% To Our Readers
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1933, 4 (First Issue)

*Summary: States that the purpose of the paper is to articulate the
Church's social program and to popularize the Popes' social encyclicals.
(DDLW \#12).*

For those who are sitting on park benches in the warm spring sunlight.

For those who are huddling in shelters trying to escape the rain.

For those who are walking the streets in the all but futile search for
work.

For those who think that there is no hope for the future, no recognition
of their plight - this little paper is addressed.

It is printed to call their attention to the fact that the Catholic
Church has a social program - to let them know that there are men of God
who are working not only for their spiritual, but for their material
welfare.

**FILLING A NEED**

It's time there was a Catholic paper printed for the unemployed.

The fundamental aim of most radical sheets is the conversion of its
readers to radicalism and atheism.

Is it not possible to be radical and not atheist?

Is it not possible to protest, to expose, to complain, to point out
abuses and demand reforms without desiring the overthrow of religion?

In an attempt to popularize and make known the encyclicals of the Popes
in regard to social justice and the program put forth by the Church for
the "reconstruction of the social order," this news sheet, *The Catholic
Worker*, is started.

It is not as yet known whether it will be a monthly, a fortnightly or a
weekly. It all depends on the funds collected for the printing and
distribution. Those who can subscribe, and those who can donate, are
asked to do so.

This first number of *The Catholic Worker* was planned, written and
edited in the kitchen of a tenement on Fifteenth Street, on subway
platforms, on the "L," the ferry. There is no editorial office, no
overhead in the way of telephone or electricity, no salaries paid.

The money for the printing of the first issue was raised by begging
small contributions from friends. A colored priest in Newark sent us ten
dollars and the prayers of his congregation. A colored sister in New
Jersey, garbed also in holy poverty, sent us a dollar. Another kindly
and generous friend sent twenty-five. The rest of it the editors
squeezed out of their own earnings, and at that they were using money
necessary to pay milk bills, gas bills, electric light bills.

By accepting delay the utilities did not know that they were furthering
the cause of social justice. They were, for the time being, unwitting
cooperators.

Next month someone may donate us an office. Who knows?

It is cheering to remember that Jesus Christ wandered this earth with no
place to lay His head. *The foxes have holes and the birds of the air
their nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay His head*. And when
we consider our fly-by-night existence, our uncertainty, we remember
(with pride at sharing the honor), that the disciples supped by the
seashore and wandered through corn fields picking the ears from the
stalks wherewith to make their frugal meals.
