% C.W. Editor Back from Nova Scotia
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1938, 1,3,4.

*Summary: Describes her trip to Antigonish, Nova Scotia and her stay
with the community. Discusses her meeting with the United Mine Workers
and how cooperative stores there have built a spiritual foundation for
their material needs distribution. Comments on the community's
independence and its inter-dependence on one other. (DDLW \#146).*


## Speaks of Steel Workers, Housing, Mine Workers

## DAY AFTER DAY


There are all sorts of odds and ends in my suitcase as I unpack from my
three weeks' trip to Nova Scotia where I covered the Rural and
Industrial conference at Antigonish. There are the pair of overalls
which Father O'Neil from Georgetown gave me after he had worn them down
into a mine one morning at Reserve Mines, Cape Breton. There are some
pouches of tobacco from the cooperative store at Reserve, and a huge
pair of white mittens, big enough for a seven-footer, knit by the
fishermen at Dover. The only, person they match in any way is Big Dan
Ort; and I'm going to give them to him to wear in the dead of winter
when he is selling The Catholic Worker up on Forty-second Street. He's a
good indoctrinator, Big Dan is, and as he sells the paper, he'll be
telling everyone of the cooperative movement at Antigonish, and there'll
be a few more street corner discussions (round table discussions, after
their fashion) on a Christian social order. . . There are some hand-spun
wools and books on crafts, and two carders which Teresa gets great
enjoyment in playing with. She is looking forward to the sheep on the
farm, and washing and carding the wool herself to make comforters. With
two sheep (not purchased yet, but one of our readers sent us the money
for them) how long will it take to make seventy-five comforters, to warm
the New York and Easton Catholic Worker gangs?

It Is good to be back, and I shall not go away again for a year. My mail
is full of invitations to speak throughout the Middle West, but I have
been wandering so much, here a month, gone a month, and now I shall stay
home for a while.

Out in front Scotty, Clark and Shorty are managing the breadline with
their usual kindliness and efficiency, and the coffee, we still insist,
is the best anywhere. We've been drinking strong, strong tea for the
last three weeks--good but not so comforting as coffee. (Scotty Just ran
in to say we had run out of sugar--we needed four pounds more to get
through the morning.) Scottv is not a Catholic, and I must tell him
about all the Scotch Catholics I met in Nova Scotia, and the Scotch
games we saw, and the Highland fling and the sword dance. And the music
which sounded like the Chinese music in the club room down at the
corner.

Joe Zarella tells me that during the festa to San Rocco the procession
has bagpipes, trumpets and goodness knows what other musical
instruments.

Eastern Steamship Lines
-----------------------

The boat was crowded going up and coming back and one can't say much for
the service on the Eastern Steamship lines. They have some kind of
inefficient arrangement in the dining room so that everyone has to wait
in line for a seat. Another bread line coming back, one not only waited
for meals, but waited for landing cards, waited again to get them
stamped, waited again to get off, so that the landing took almost two
and a half hours. One man who had been abroad fifty three times said
that it was easier to get into Germany than back into the United States.

But the trip was enjoyable with a day and a night on the ocean. Going up
it was foggy and the fog horns mourned, but coming back it was clear and
warm. Landing at Yarmouth one had to ride from eleven in the morning
till one-thirty at night to get to Antigonish, so we stopped off at
Truro that night and proceeded on again the next morning.

United Mine Workers
-------------------

No sooner had we landed at the "Extension" offices of Francis Xavier
University, which is the seat of the Cooperative movement, than Father
Coady announced we were going right back to Truro to address a
convention of the United Mine Workers. Delighted at the closeness of the
organized labor movement to the cooperative movement, I was glad to go.
I had gone up there to learn about what was being done,--to sit in at
the conferences of St. Francis Xavier University,--but found I had to
begin speaking once again. Before I was through, I had talked to miners,
steel workers, farmers and fishermen and many of them have been taking
THE CATHOLIC WORKER for years and were close supporters of the movement.
It made me feel again how necessary a penny paper is, that can be sent
out by the bundle. It is all the better that it comes only once a month
and is only eight pages. The workers do not read a great deal and the
reiteration of general principles, and the ideas for a new social order
we are stressing, come with so much the more force.

Miners and Steel Workers
------------------------

The cooperative stores that the miners and steel workers in Sidney and
Reserve, and Glare Bay have started are models of efficiency and
cleanliness. It sounds so paltry to say that--to say that they are the
equal of any well-run chain store, when they mean so much more. They
mean that groups of the workers have gotten together to study
conditions: they have put into it their earnings to buy shares when they
were working only two and three days a week with large families to
support; they have scrubbed and painted and schemed and figured, to make
it a success. It's a store in the office of which you see missals lying
on the desk. It's a store where the board thinks in terms of prayer to
straighten out difficulties. The old stores used to give credit and
gouge the customers. But that credit meant enslavement. It meant that
stores shut off credit in times of strikes.

"But we know what it means to go hungry," one of the board said. "We
have known the times in our own childhood when our fathers came home
with nothing but a loaf of bread for the whole family to eat. We know
that voluntary poverty and the Works of Mercy which the Catholic Worker
stresses must have their place in this movement too. We know that the
spiritual foundation is everything that without it material success
means nothing. We are working because we are members of the Mystical
Body and we know that when the health of one member suffers the health
of the whole body is lowered.

"So we are starting a St. Vincent de Paul Society to build up the idea
of mutual charity and mutual aid. Everyone bringing in what he can
spare. One of the members of the cooperative board is the prime mover."

Housing
-------

It is hard trying to write this at the last minute before going to
press. One can only touch on a few of the highlights of the Antigonish
movement. But after all, our readers can get pamphlets and materials by
writing to the Extension Department, St. Francis Xavier University,
Antigonish, Nova Scotia. Tell them you are a Catholic Workers reader and
they'll send on the pamphlets telling how they got started.

The housing project that is started by the miners deserves a whole
article. They started with ten families in a study club and now they
have a village they call Tompkinsville after Fr. J. J. Tompkins who with
Father Coady are the prime movers of the new order in Maritime Provinces
(which include Nova Scotia, Cape Breton, New Brunswick, New Foundland.)
All the men in the group are miners and they have known each other since
childhood. They average in age 30 years. The oldest is around forty-five
and the youngest twenty-one. There are 53 members of the community
counting the children. They studied their problems for six months before
they started; they designed their houses even to the extent of building
them of cardboard first. The houses are all 22 by 26 feet and the ten
acres of land cost fifty dollars an acre. They have an option on an
additional ten acres for a communal farm adjoining, to work in their
spare time.

Then when the whole plan was worked out they were able to get allowances
from thc government of $2,000, five hundred of which is for their labor
since they are doing the work themselves. None of the men are
carpenters. They are all miners. But by calling in occasionally a
skilled carpenter, mason and plumber they are able to put up the houses
themselves. One is complete, bath and all, as a sample to work out the
budget, and the other ten are going up with all the men working on all
the houses at once. To work so that all the houses will be ready for
them at the same time, they dug all the foundations first, then did the
cement work, then the framework, and so on. They have appointed a
foreman out of their number and they keep a time sheet. On the days when
the mines are not working the men put in ten hours a day. The days they
put in eight hours at the mines, they put in four on the house building.
One man said that he had been forced to be absent for one day because he
had put in sixteen hours straight at the mines, filling in for one of
the men who was off.

Mainadieu
---------

The fishing and farming community where I spoke was down on the top of
Cape Breton. There are not many houses in the little settlement but the
men came from along the shore and from inland, and families came with
their children. We had oil lamps lit, four of them hanging in a
chandelier in the middle of the room. Even the glebe house, which is
what they call the rectory, has no electricity or running water. It was
a serious, sympathetic crowd which gathered together to listen that
night. Everywhere one found readers of THE CATHOLIC WORKER who felt that
they knew us all, here in New York and in our other branches. It was
good to talk to them.

Next morning Teresa, Fr. Poiriet and I got up at six-thirty and took one
of the fishing boats (with an old automobile engine in it) out to
Scaterie Island which is eight miles out from the mainland and extends
seven miles out into the ocean. It as the last tip of land Lindbergh saw
as he made his first flight cross the ocean.

When we got to the furthest tip of the island and pulled at the little
dock we still had a walk of a mile across the island to get to the
Church. There are only twenty families on the island, living on either
side of it, and Father Poiriet gets over there once a month. He had to
hear a great many confessions before Mass began, even the littlest girls
and boys all dressed up for the great occasion, preparing to receive
"Him Whom the heavens and sea cannot contain."

There was a sermon, and after the Mass we had a little meeting out in
front of the Church from the steps, looking out over the sea where the
fishing boats were out already. The men on Scaterie had stayed late
ashore to receive Communion.

We had breakfast in the little three-room house of one of the
families--a meal of porridge, tea and toast. The young mother of nine
children, two of them had died,--served us daintily, holding a baby in
her arms who crowed at us blissfully.

It is a hard life for the women there on the island, what with the long
winters when the children are within doors. It's next to impossible to
get a doctor there in the winter, the sea is so full of floating ice,
and last winter she had been ill with scarlet fever when the baby was
born, and the other children down with it too. A gallant and brave
woman, young Mrs. Wadden.

None of the people consider themselves to be leading heroic lives,
heroic in their patience and endurance of poverty. They are independent
and sturdy, and they have hopefully started a study and a credit union.
When the fishing is good and the market good, they get ten cents a pound
for the sword-fish which come to as big as five hundred pounds. Then
they have a good winter. But they must organize their marketing, and
besides that they must study farming and handicrafts. There is not a
plough on the island and only one horse. There are cows and chickens,
but no sheep,

More to Come
------------

We are going to write more and more about this work during the coming
winter. We wish our readers to know of this power house which is
Antigonish, which is sending light over the continent. They are in their
beginnings after years of patient endurance and study. They are working
the "little way" and little St. Therese whose statue stands over the
altar in the Church on Scaterie Island must love them.
