% Work
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1949, 4,6.

*Summary: Reviews Dom Remhert Sorg's, O.S.B. pamphlet "Towards a
Benediction Theology of Manual Labor." Discusses the traditional views
of labor from both a philosophical and theological outlook, particularly
that of the Egyptian Monks. Also mentions other writers who have
contributed to a philosophy of labor. (DDLW \#165).*

We are apt to assume here in The **Catholic Worker** that our Ideals on
work (manual labor In this case) are well-known. Peter Maurin made
manual labor and voluntary poverty the foundation of his teaching and
these are our techniques of action, he said. Always he quoted St.
Benedict whose motto "Pray and Work" was his also. He and Father Virgil
Michel the Benedictine, used to talk endlessly about work in relation to
bodily and mental health and in his vision of the integrated life-a life
In which man would be as happy as possible in his labors- he always
talked of the necessity of our using our bodies as well as out minds. Ho
pointed with scorn to the fact that men in factories were alluded to as
"hands" and that field workers in our huge industrial system of farming
are considered "hands" also. It is well known, of course, that Peter
opposed the capitalist industrial system on the land as well as in the
city. He well recognized the plight of the migrant workers who are
necessary to keep such a system of agriculture going.

The thing he always kept pointing out was that we did not take into
consideration the needs of man and since man is not made to live alone,
when we talk about man, we think also of the family and it's needs; of
light, space and air, a home of one's own, a garden for the children, a
place to work and to play, and tools for work, and is it too much to
expect that our dear Lord who provides us with all things necessary for
body and soul, did not intend that we should have these means with which
to work and to pray.

A Theology of Labor
-------------------

There la very 11ttle written on the subject of work that is available to
students; much is written about the worker these days but very little
about work itself, so when a pamphlet entitled "**Towards A Benedictine
Theology of Manual Labor**" came Into the office last month I was
delighted. It is by Dom Rembert Sorg, O.S.B. and it can be obtained from
St. Procopius Abbey, Benedictine Orient, Lisle Illinois. It is
duplicated there for private distribution. Father Rembert himself is
known to all readers of Orate Frates for his very splendid articles. His
own address is Holy Cross Mission, Fifield, Wisconsin, where he is
living his philosophy of labor. In his introduction, he alludes to one
of the publications of the Catholic Universality of America Press for
1945 by Rev. Arthur T. Geoghegan, **The Attitude Towards Labor In Early
Christianity and Ancient Culture**. Unfortunately this thesis is out of
print, but I had the opportunity to go through it and certainly feel
that it is a book that should be made available to the layman. It
reminded me of a volume entitled "The Ancient Lowly" which I picked up
in a secondhand store some years ago by a Socialist who

wrote about the history of labor from the earliest times and whose
thesis was that they were the exploited and the dispossessed and that
his job was to contribute to their enlightenment and class-war
consciousness.

In the whole study of labor and of work there is usually an acceptance
of our capitalistic industrial system and the acceptance of the machine
as the means to do away with human labor. A. J. Penty has well handled
the subject of the machine and Eric Gill also, and the work of these two
writers should be reviewed again and again in the study of a philosophy
of labor. But here is a book by Father Song which is of exceptional
interest to all in the lay apostolate which has more than a philosophy
of labor; it has a theology of labor. It treats of the Benedictine
monastic tradition and quotes extensively from the Fathers of the
Church. He says In the Introduction "the crux of the question of manual
labor in St. Benedict's rule lies in that variously interpreted passage,
'If, however, the needs of the place require them to labor in gathering
the harvest, let them not grieve at that, for then they are truly monks
when they live by the labor of their hands as our fathers and the
apostle did. But let all things be done in moderation on account of the
faint heart."

Peter Maurin's idea for our farming communes was that there should be
four hours of manual labor a day. If all the people did this
conscientiously, putting in four solid hours a day, there would be time
indeed for study and prayer, for the intellectual work of reading and
study as well as for the clerical work which is a toilsome accompaniment
to such work as ours.

Father Sorg's treatise goes back to St. Anthony of Egypt who rejoiced in
never having been troublesome to anyone else on account of labor of his
hands. The great rules of St. Pachomius and St. Basil both called for
manual labor. St. Jerome said that the monasteries of Egypt would accept
no monks who would not do manual work and In St. Basil a rule the strict
rule of manual labor is inculcated. His rule states: "When you taught us
that manual labor 1s necessary, it remaineth that we be taught the kind
that suits our profession." He enumerates various suitable kinds, but
selects agriculture as being the mod congenial and the motives laid down
were self-support, alms giving and asceticism.

"The first purpose of the monks manual labor was, of course,
self-support. What was Important in their spirit is that this
self-support is the first step towards, and the lowliest attainment of
charity. It is out of the question to speak of charity in a man that
does not try to support himself, any more than to think of Christian
faith in a father who even though he attempt some noble missionary
enterprise In the Church, neglects to feed his own children. St. Paul
would say of him that he hath denied the faith and is worse than an
infidel.

Own Burdens
-----------

With the usual paradox that we find over and over again in the New
Testament, we are told to bear our own burdens in Gal. 6,5 and then
later on, we are told to bear one another's burdens. So In addition to
our working we are also to help others. Consistently throughout the New
Testament we hear the injunction not to judge, if we do not wish to be
judged, so that when we read these things, it is to take them to
ourselves, to work ourselves, to feed our own bodies and souls, and with
whatever we have left, feed others.

Perhaps Father Sorg is a bit harsh when he quotes from the Didache. For
the one time that St. Paul says "if a man will not work, neither let him
eat," the entire New Testament, the sayings of our Lord, incline us
toward tender kindness towards our fellows and an aversion to judging.
We have suffered much in the Catholic Worker movement from all the
people who come and look at the men on our bread lines (and we are
feeding 500 a day in both Detroit and New York right now) and say, "Are
you not contributing to the delinquency of these men by feeding them?

The problem of unemployment and alcoholism is so acute these days that
both New York and Chicago newspapers have been running accounts of the
skid roads and the men on them. The I.W.W. paper published in Chicago
has a delightful satire on the series that ran in the Chicago News.
Everyone likes to see the end of a story the writer said, and the reason
for this fascinated interest on the part of the readers which boosted
the circulation of the News to 20,000 is because this is the end of the
story for them as well as the men on skid road. This is the logical
conclusion of our present system. And the story goes on to tell of a
little boy asking, Who are all these men? and the reply being given,
they are hoboes, and he wanted to know if there were not any "Mama"
hoboes. The story points out that there is a high death rate and no
birth rate and yet the numbers keep increasing. The I.W.W. song that
deals with this situation is that famous one "Halleluia, I'm a Bum" and
one of the verses runs: "Why don't you work like other men do? How can I
work when there's no work to do?"

On every side we see work that needs to be done; even to the sweeping of
the streets and the cleaning up of lots, the repairing of old buildings
to provide for the homeless. But If a man took a broom and started to
sweep a street, he would soon find himself put on the psychopathic ward,
and if a group darted to clean up a vacant lot for children to play in,
not only would they be trespassing on another man's property but the
neighbors themselves, made irresponsible by our denial (in effect) of
private property, would soon clutter up the lot again by tossing
garbage, tin cans and bottles out of the windows.

"The workers as a mass have lost a philosophy of labor," as Peter says
and they have lost a philosophy of poverty. And it is good when a book
like this comes along that will stimulate thought on man's work, his
need for work, and his desire to work.

It breaks our hearts here at the **Catholic Worker** to see these lines
of men who need work as much as they need bread and we do not have the
work to give them.

We have farms, it is true, but you cannot cultivate the earth or build
shelters for the workers without skills, tools and materials, and God
has seen fit to keep usIn such poverty that we are not able to provide
these. The miracle of the loaves and fishes is repeated over and over
again so that we could almost say "We can do all things in Him who
strengthens us." Certainly by ourselves we could never have kept going
with the cost of food going up 40%. We still put the same food on the
table regardless of the numbers who come. Even with "rationing" we still
had coffee--not that coffee is as necessary as soup but St. Joseph is
tender and tempers the wind to the shorn lamb. Somehow or other just
enough comes in, just enough to keep going, through the almsgiving of
the faithful and through the fact that everyone works in the movement
without salary and is pledged to voluntary poverty, to the greater or
less degree that they can take it.

St. John Chrysostom
-------------------

Father Sorg's book is utterly delightful and he has chosen a wealth of
quotations from the early fathers. St. John Chrysostom writes: "The sun
being risen, they depart, each one to their work, gathering thence the
Lord's supply for the needy." In St. John Chrysostom's Homilies,
"almsgiving is the love of Christ. The manual labor of monks a sacred
spiritual thing and a Holy Communion."

"Nowhere have I seen love so in flower, nowhere such quick compassion or
hospitality so eager," says St. Rufinus. "So great is the love that is
in them and by so strong affection are they bound towards one another
and towards all brethren that they are an example and wonder to all . .
. one gets the impression that the Holy Spirit abounded in that country
like fire in a dry woods and that society in that region was pregnant
with Christ and that you could almost live on love alone."

"It was the custom, not only among these, but among almost all the
Egyptian monks, to hire themselves out at harvest time as harvesters;
and one among them would earn eighty measures of corn more or less, and
offer the greater part of it to the poor so that not only the hungry
folk of that countryside were fed, but ships were sent to Alexandria,
laden with corn, to be divided among such as were prisoners In jails, or
as were foreigners and in need, for there was not enough poverty In
Egypt to consume the fruit of their compassion and their lavishness."

The third purpose of the monks' labor was ascetical. "In avoiding the
sweat of the face, the drudgery of the thorns and the thistles, all of
which are the punishment of sin, and which induce sloth and atrophy, the
rich shirk work itself, which is not a punishment of sin, but a
glorious, pleasurable exercise of human nature's God-given faculties."

Father Sore holds that those who do not work at manual labor have more
than ordinary trouble with the desires of the flesh. "Poverty coupled
with manual labor is charity's twin sister and inseparable companion,"
and he even goes on to say that people who do intellectual labor and who
go in for artificial physical exercise as a substitute for human natures
ontological need for manual work have also a substitute chastity. "The
inference is quite likely that a substitute manual labor induces some
sort of substitute chastity and not the real virtue which, as St. Thomas
teaches, consists principally in charity.

He goes in also for a deeper theology of manual labor In dealing with
man as co-creator with God: taking the raw materials that God has
provided, making things of use and of beauty and thus bringing about in
his life that synthesis of cult, culture and cultivation that Peter
Maurin used to talk so much about.

I could write much more on this whole subject but I am sure that what I
have written will induce our friends to write to Father Sorg and get
this very inspiring booklet.
