% Aims and Purposes
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1940, 7.

*Summary: Restates the central vision of the Catholic Worker Movement as
working for "a new heaven and a new *earth,* wherein justice dwelleth."
This vision recognizes the "primacy of the spritual" and the doctrine of
the Mystical Body of Christ. The Catholic Worker is "a new way of life"
involving Houses of Hospitality for the daily practice of the Works of
Mercy and Farming Communes where each person can take responsibility of
doing their part. (DDLW \#182).*

For the sake of new readers, for the sake of men on our breadlines, for
the sake of the employed and unemployed, the organized and unorganized
workers, and also for the sake of ourselves, we must reiterate again and
again what are our aims and purposes.

Together with the Works of Mercy, feeding, clothing and sheltering our
brothers, we must indoctrinate. We must "give reason for the faith that
is in us." Otherwise we are scattered members of the Body of Christ, we
are not "all members one of another." Otherwise, our religion is an
opiate, for ourselves alone, for our comfort or for our individual
safety or indifferent custom.

We cannot live alone. We cannot go to Heaven alone. Otherwise, as PÃ©guy
said, God will say to us, "Where are the others?" (This is in one sense
only as, of course, we believe that we must be what we would have the
other fellow be. We must look to ourselves, our own lives first.)

If we do not keep indoctrinating, we lose the vision. And if we lose the
vision, we become merely philanthropists, doling out palliatives.

The vision is this. We are working for "a new heaven and a new *earth*,
wherein justice dwelleth." We are trying to say with action, "Thy will
be done on *earth* as it is in heaven." We are working for a Christian
social order.

We believe in the brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God. This
teaching, the doctrine of the Mystical Body of Christ, involves today
the issue of unions (where men call each other brothers); it involves
the racial question; it involves cooperatives, credit unions, crafts; it
involves Houses of Hospitality and Farming Communes. It is with all
these means that we can live as though we believed indeed that we are
all members one of another, knowing that when "the health of one member
suffers, the health of the whole body is lowered."

This work of ours toward a new heaven and a new earth shows a
correlation between the material and the spiritual, and, of course,
recognizes the primacy of the spiritual. Food for the body is not
enough. There must be food for the soul. Hence the leaders of the work,
and as many as we can induce to join us, must go daily to Mass, to
receive food for the soul. And as our perceptions are quickened, and as
we pray that our faith be increased, we will see Christ in each other,
and we will not lose faith in those around us, no matter how stumbling
their progress is. It is easier to have faith that God will support each
House of Hospitality and Farming Commune and supply our needs in the way
of food and money to pay bills, than it is to keep a strong, hearty,
living faith in each individual around us - to see Christ in him. If we
lose faith, if we stop the work of indoctrinating, we are in a way
denying Christ again.

We must practice the presence of God. He said that when two or three are
gathered together, there He is in the midst of them. He is with us in
our kitchens, at our tables, on our breadlines, with our visitors, on
our farms. When we pray for our material needs, it brings us close to
His humanity. He, too, needed food and shelter. He, too, warmed His
hands at a fire and lay down in a boat to sleep.

When we have spiritual reading at meals, when we have the rosary at
night, when we have study groups, forums, when we go out to distribute
literature at meetings, or sell it on the street corners, Christ is
there with us. What we do is very little. But it is like the little boy
with a few loaves and fishes. Christ took that little and increased it.
He will do the rest. What we do is so little we may seem to be
constantly failing. But so did He fail. He met with apparent failure on
the Cross. But unless the seed fall into the earth and die, there is no
harvest.

And why must we see results? Our work is to sow. Another generation will
be reaping the harvest.

When we write in these terms, we are writing not only for our fellow
workers in thirty other Houses, to other groups of Catholic Workers who
are meeting for discussion, but to every reader of the paper. We hold
with the motto of the National Maritime Union, that every member is an
organizer. We are upholding the ideal of personal responsibility. You
can work as you are bumming around the country on freights, if you are
working in a factory or a field or a shipyard or a filling station. You
do not depend on any organization which means only paper figures, which
means only the labor of the few. We are not speaking of mass action,
pressure groups (fearful potential for evil as well as good). We are
addressing each individual reader of *The Catholic Worker.*

The work grows with each month, the circulation increases, letters come
in from all over the world, articles are written about the movement in
many countries.

Statesmen watch the work, scholars study it, workers feel its
attraction, those who are in need flock to us and stay to participate.
It is a new way of life. But though we grow in numbers and reach far-off
corners of the earth, essentially the work depends on each one of us, on
our way of life, the little works we do.

"Where are the others?" God will say. Let us not deny Him in those about
us. Even here, right now, we can have that new earth, wherein justice
dwelleth!
