% In Sundry Times and Places
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1942, 4.

*Summary: Contrasts the scenic countryside as she travels by bus and
Phil. 4:8-9 with a magazine article description of commando training in
England. (DDLW \#219).*

Glendive, Montana, May 29, 3:30 a.m.

All around stretch the sugar beet fields (for which is proposed Japanese
labor). In the East the sky is apple green. A brisk wind blows down the
main street as I wait for a bus to take me on to Minneapolis. It will
get in at 10:30 tonight. It takes two days across this third largest
state in the union.

Even in the smallest towns one does not get away from the war. Man power
diminished, homes broken up. In every bus there are soldiers and sailors
going home for, or returning from, leave.

My seat companion, a blonde Scandinavian girl from Minnesota, who has
slept in the most relaxed way all day yesterday against me, offers me a
magazine to read. It is the *Cosmopolitan.* I had just been reading
Father Stedman's little edition of the New Testament--some beautiful
lines from St. Paul's epistle to the Philippians.

One of the first articles in the magazine which struck my eye was on the
training of the commandos over in England, teaching young men to be
"hard-bitten, ferocious, tough, ruthless, learning to kill the way the
enemy kills."

The new tactics in training introduced by Sir James Grigg, Minister of
War, include turning God's beautiful countryside into a "modern hell."
Animals entrails obtained from a local slaughter house, hung on barbed
wire to simulate the sights and smells of modern battlefields.

"Loudspeakers blare out noises of modern battle. The roar of planes, the
scream sirens make as dive-bombers roar down at you, shrieks of the
wounded, moans of the dying...." Men going into action without food,
drink or sleep.

Instructors goading men on with insult and recriminations. What's the
matter? Are you afraid? Yellow, eh? Remember Dunkirk? Remember Crete
where they killed your brother! Remember Hong King where they raped your
sister! You're soft! You're yellow! They'll rape your mother if you
don't catch them. Why are you waiting. Hurry, you're late, you're soft,
you're yellow!"

"The article goes on to describe the "mad frenzy of the men ...They got
almost maniacal." Bayonets to be taken away because "battle-maddened
students got too realistic and charged anyone in sight."

The article is entitled: "Every Man a Commando."

On all sides of me were scenes of beauty as I read. Snowcapped
mountains, birds singing on fenceposts, herds of sheep, swollen streams,
lush pastures, blue skies and a long road ahead.

Think on These Things
===

And the passage that I had been reading in the New Testament, Phil. 4:
8-9, was:

"Whatever things are true, whatever honorable, whatever just, whatever
holy, whatever lovable, whatever of good repute, if there be any virtue,
if anything worthy of praise, think on these things. And what you have
learned and received and heard and seen in me, these things practice.
And the God of peace will be with you."

A far cry indeed!
