% On Pilgrimage - December 1946
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1946, 1, 8.

*Summary: Describes a visit to Martin de Porres house of hospitality in
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Reflects on the seeming futility of the work
and how "it is undoubtedly a manifestation of love, of God's love."
(DDLW \#228).*

The cold has got us at last! I know now why clerks in Dickens' stories
always sat on high stools. It was to keep far away from the drafty
floor.

One room in Maryflat has a fireplace and Elizabeth Ryan and Mrs.
Houlihan go out every day and collect wood for it. It makes a cheerful
glow. In Bethlehem, the flat downstairs, we light the gas oven. The
fresh paint and red curtains Kay put up before Thanksgiving makes that
place warm; the good fellowship helps. They were rigging up a primitive
loom in there the other night to demonstrate weaving.

Downstairs in the office there is a good old laundry stove with the
racks all around the octagonal sides where the irons used to stand. The
faithful thing keeps the place warm all night and it's a treat to come
in in the morning. The getting up and washing is always a chore in the
cold months. We begin to take on that grimy look of pinched red roses
and smears of soot from the fireplaces and the stove.

But it's all very invigorating when there is that snap in the air and
the low hung gray clouds promising snow.

Harrisburg
===

Mary Frecon is still going strong in Harrisburg and I spent a night with
her last month on my way to the coal fields. Seventh street, in the
shadow of the capitol, is still the unspeakable slum, a shanty town with
privies owned, a good part of it, by the city itself, and held without
repairs because some day the local government intends to tear down the
houses and make a broad high way and freight yard along the tracks of
the railroad. Meanwhile I have seen it the same for eight years now, and
the poor live and marry and give birth and die in surroundings not fit
for pigs.

The Martin de Porres house was bright and colorful and filled with
children as we drove up at five-thirty last week. Downstairs there is a
big room for games and play and behind it a little kitchen with a coal
range and a gas stove. For a year or so, Mary did without running water
like the rest of her neighbors (sometimes a whole block get water from
one spigot) but now she has a good big sink and cold water, a great
luxury. Upstairs there are two rooms, a big living room and a bedroom
where 80-year old Mrs. Richards sleeps in her big featherbed which she
has had since her marriage. She has given birth to and buried many
children, has Mrs. Richards, and now she is living with Mary, and
helping too. I slept on a cot in the front room that night and Mrs.
Frecon slept in the featherbed with Mrs. Richards, and it was so warm we
didn't need fires, and I am sure that the featherbed must have been very
warm, too warm.

Helpers
===

There are a few colored women who help Mary Frecon and are her faithful
friends in this long fight for the rights of these brothers of ours.
There are high school girls who come in and work with the children. But
in general it has been a long, slow, and lonely job, this working for
the poorest and most neglected of God's children. "We just don't seem to
get anywhere,'' Mary said, matter of factly, not with dejection. "It
goes on day after day, just the same." And it seems to me that her work
there is a perfect example of the seed falling into the ground and
seeming to die. It is the unfailing history of any of growth. "Unless
the seed falls into the ground and dies, it remains alone. But if it
dies, it brings forth much fruit." Mrs. Frecon has been dying there
these last eight years, working alone, seemingly with no results. She
does not know how many people remember the story of the dying girl she
dragged in out of the alleyway to nurse. She will never know how many
people she has influenced throughout the country to undertake and to
continue in work for God's littlest ones.

Time to Love
===

A priest said to me recently, "there is no time left to do much about
the social order now. It is not only later than you think. It is too
late for anything but love." With my own unfailing optimism I could
never agree with him that it was too late, but it is a good thing to
think upon when we see nothing being done, nothing being accomplished,
seemingly.

What is Mary Frecon doing? She is loving her brothers, fervently,
steadily, faithfully, unfailingly. And there is nothing saccharine,
soft, or sentimental about it either. It is a love of preference. She
prefers to be with them and she lives with them. She prefers to serve
them, work for them, help them in any little way she can. There is no
glory in it, no visible results in it. There is nothing in it, in other
words, for her, either in money, power or glory. But it is undoubtedly a
manifestation of love, of God's love, and that of one human being for
others. And so it is something tremendous.

So we thank Mary Frecon for being like MARY in bringing Christ, who is
our Love, to us in these ways.
