% About Cuba
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1961, 1, 2, 7, 8.

*Summary: Addresses the issue of supporting the Cuban revolution while
the Church is being persecuted there. Reaffirms solidarity with the poor
and is critical of clergy who ignore the poor. Affirms opposition to
violent revolution and the ultimate triumph of good over evil. (DDLW
\#246).*

Each day there is some new word about Cuba and the revolution going on
there, and we have had many letters from our readers asking us to
clarify our position. This is extremely difficult to do, since we are
religious in our attitude with a great love for Holy Mother Church; and
we are also revolutionaries, in our own fashion.

No matter what we say, I am afraid we will not be able to make ourselves
clear. I shall write from my own point of view, from my own experience,
which is a long one, among the poor, the workers, organized labor, and
throughout a long series of wars, "imperialist wars," class wars, civil
wars, race wars. Shall I say that it is almost fifty years of struggle,
since at 14 I began to read the class-conscious fiction of Upton
Sinclair, who is called the Dickens of America, and Jack London, who is
a best seller in Russia, not to speak of the *Day Book* in Chicago which
was a socialist, ad-less newspaper on which Carl Sandburg worked, and
one of my brothers also.

A good part of this will probably be written in Church where I'll be
groaning and sweating, trying to understand and clarify my ideas to
present them so that our 70,000 copies of the paper will be read and
understood. I won't say 70,000 readers, since libraries and schools get
copies and many read them. Who knows who reads the paper or who will be
so influenced by the paper that they too will try to see things in the
light of the faith, in the light of the history of the Church, and the
history of the poor, who are the first children of the Church.

In the pile of mail waiting for me when I returned from the west coast
shore there was a clipping from *The Sunday Visitor*, read by millions
of Catholics and found in practically every church in the land. It
certainly influences the thinking of our Catholic people.

The first part of the clipping is about the counter revolutionary
movement in Cuba and among the exiles in Miami, the move towards an
invasion and the formation of a peoples' revolutionary front which had
defected from Castro and "possibly deliberate Communist plants, designed
to, retrieve the revolution after the fall of Fidel Castro." "What is
even more disturbing and frightening is the indication that the
formation of this leftist dominated provisional group was-facilitated by
men within our own government."

Theft the clipping. goes on to discuss the Catholic Worker, calling Dave
Dellinger's article "so blatantly filled with misstatements, out and out
lies, that it does not seem to me possible it could have been written in
good faith."

There is a great deal of name calling in the article as well as name
dropping, so the article gives the impression that the writer is "in the
know," is acquainted personally with everyone he mentions, as indeed he
may be, having been a journalist and having lived in Cuba for some time.
But I too come from a newspaper family and know well the widely
divergent points of view that there can be in one family on men and
events. One brother was a foreign correspondent for twenty years,
another the editor of a Hearst paper in New York. We are, as a family,
trained journalists, one might say. And we interpret the news quite
differently.

I have not been in Cuba, except as a stopover coming home from Mexico,
but I was in Mexico City during the persecution of the Church in the
20's, when the Churches had just reopened In 1929. The laws of the state
against the Church are still on the books in 1961, though the church is
functioning as normally as it can in our materialist civilization. While
I was in Mexico, at the same time that the Church was being persecuted
and Mexico was being denounced by the Catholic press as being
communistic, my friend Tina Medotti was being arrested and other
communists were going into hiding. When I interviewed General Sandino,
the Nicaraguan leader, who was opposing United States troops in his own
country, he stated clearly he was a communist for his own country not
for Russia; that he was a communist because he was for the poor.

Aided by Communists
---

When the CIO was being organized in 1936 there was many a communist
organizer whose skill and courage was made use of by non-Communist top
brass, including Joseph Curran who even testified as to this position
before the House UnAmerican Activities Committee. "Sure I accepted help
from the Communists," he stated flatly. (I was present at the hearing in
Washington D.C. with Mrs. John Brophy, whose husband was vice president
of the CIO and worked closely with John L. Levis.) "Who else gave us any
help?" he asked boldly, ignoring the fact of the CW headquarters on
Tenth Avenue where tons of coffee, peanut butter, cottage cheese, jam
and bread had been consumed during the three months' strike of 1937.
Though it cost us thousands, and many a ship's crew took up collections
for repaying us this aid, it probably was but a drop in the bucket in
building up the organization of the National Maritime Union, its
headquarters, publications, officers, legal help, etc.

And since when have there been free elections in any of the great unions
of the United States? Once the workers get a leader who delivers the
goods, they hold on to him. And when they want a change, it is a bitter
struggle to bring about democratic elections. Joseph P. Ryan, of the
East Coast Longshoremen for many years used to call meetings with a gun
or the table in front of him. Strong-arm tactics, the use of force and
bribery, are well known in our unions.

But there is no use in the pot calling the kettle black. It is not the
"clean hands" policy that I am speaking of. I know how complicated all
these problems of justice are, how deep the roots of corruption in our
human nature. "The just will be judged first," St. Peter said, and we
must think of the power of example. "What you do speaks so loudly that I
cannot hear what you say."

With the Poor
---

It is hard too to say that the place of The Catholic Worker is with the
poor, and that being there, we are often finding ourselves on the side
of the persecutors of the Church. This is a tragic fact. It is hard too
to be writing from New York, where one is not in danger. It is hard to
write this way, when I know that were I in Cuba and I heard a mob
shouting outside a church for the blood of the priests and worshipers
within, I would then be on the side of the "faithful." Of course
persecution is deserved and undeserved. And also it is promised us. "The
servant is not above his master and if they have persecuted me they will
persecute you also." If we are not being persecuted there is something
wrong with us. This is not having a persecution complex.

One could weep with the tragedy of denying Christ in the poor. The
Church is the Cross on which Christ is crucified and one does not
separate Christ from his cross, Guardini wrote. Christ has left Himself
to us in the bread and wine on the altar; He has left Himself to those
who gather together, two and three in His name; He has left Himself to
us in the poor. "There I am in the midst of you." "If you do it unto the
least of these my brethren you do it unto me." "I am Christ whom thou
persecutest". Saul was imprisoning and putting to death those who walked
in the Way, and Christ cried out on the road to Damascus, "Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me?"

Fidel Castro says he is not persecuting Christ, but Churchmen who have
betrayed him. He says that he differentiates between Christ and the
clergy, the Church and the clergy. He reassures the people that they can
administer the sacrament of baptism themselves. That a marriage is
consummated by the act of marriage and is blessed by the priest. The
fact that he has to make these things clear to his people shows how
deeply religious they are, that they need reassuring. He asked the
clergy to remain and to teach when he took over the schools and
nationalized church property. God knows he needs teachers to send out
all over the island to reach the furthermost corners of it. But the
reply according to our diocesan press, was that priests and nuns would
not teach communism to their students And Castro in his turn taunted
them with the fact that all they thought of was money and property.

We are a spectacle to the world, we Catholics, fighting each other like
this, flinging taunts back and forth. (After all Castro is a Catholic.)

California
---

A few months ago I came back from the west coast where I saw the
hierarchy silent in the face of the slavery and exploitation of the
bracero and the agricultural worker. There bad been a lettuce strike in
the Imperial Valley where thousands of braceros imported from Mexico,
were harvesting the crop. The Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee
and the Packinghouse Worker's Union held meetings at the entrance to the
fields urging the workers to come out on strike and not to take the jobs
of their brothers. There were many arrests and some of the organizers
were put in prison. Some sympathetic priests came to speak at the
meeting and were rebuked by the diocesan Officials, some of whom even
went so far as to say that some communists masquerading as priests had
appeared at the union meetings.

The strike was over by the time I reached El Centro, and I talked with
some of the townspeople, all of whom thought it had been a great loss of
crop and manpower, a real defeat for worker, for grower and for
"broker." I went to the large Catholic Church and found a notice in the
door "Anyone asking for jobs or help, go to the police department."

Later I heard Billy Joe Shelby, one of the agricultural workers and
himself an organizer, tell how the police were filling up the jails with
workers. It was obvious that those in need were not going to go to the
police department. And how strange it is that the very priests who
complain of the State taking over and of what amounts to state ownership
of the indigent, should be the ones to shout communism when the
principle of subsidiarily is being put into effect through efforts to
organize into unions, and who send the poor to the police and to the
State.

Stockton
---

Later I went with Andy Arellano to skid row in Stockton at five o'clock
in the morning and saw the artificial labor shortages created to bolster
up the importation of braceros, to make it appear that it was absolutely
necessary for the harvesting of the crops to import men without families
whose wages are filched from them by profiteering store keepers, who are
charged exorbitant sums for cashing checks, for sending money orders.

How sad it is to see men waiting for work, standing in the market place
waiting for hours to be hired, sober, industrious men, with a
pathetically small paper bag containing a sandwich for their lunch, men
with their short handled hoe ready to thin beets at truly backbreaking
labor. They say America won't do stoop labor, but there were plenty of
Americans there, and Lise Bowman who writes a letter in this issue
follows the crops all summer with her husband and a little girl of four.
"I earned money too," the little girl said, and the mother proudly
informed us she had earned two or three dollars, picking olives, and had
bought her oven shoes.

Where are the priests among the poor, following the crops and those who
pick them? You can count them on the fingers of one hand. Assigned to
parish work, in towns, there is little chance for close contact.

New York
---

Only I few days after I had returned to New York, I was on my way up
Second Avenue to go to Nativity Church which is in the heart of the
slums, where Puerto Ricans are crowded together, where store front
churches abound and where some of the worst gangs of the city hang out.
At night the streets are alive with children. They cannot go to bed
until they are ready to drop with exhaustion because the rooms are too
crowded. The parents go out to the service jobs in institutions, to the
heavy jobs in laundries, to the hard and least paid labor. There are few
parochial schools in these slums. But there was a boys' Academy and as I
went to the eight thirty Mass, crowds of well dressed, well fed young
students were crossing the avenue to make their nine o'clock classes.
The contrast between their lives and the lives of the Puerto Rican boys
they passed was painful. How many parishes, how many of the clergy are
there in these sections of our great city of New York, and how many of
the Puerto Ricans are they able to reach? Fr Janner and his fellow
priests break their hearts over their work. Two teenagers had killed
themselves these last months with overdoses of drugs, Fr. Janner told
me.

A convent built in the slums for twelve nuns at the cost of \$85,000. A
family of twelve Puerto Ricans living in a two-room tenement house
apartment. These things should not be. Billions of dollars in buildings,
plants, as they have come to be called, including Church, school,
convent and rectory, and nothing spent on the family, on youth.

Even worse, it is the family who pays for all this, the working man who
wants his children to have a "Catholic education," who is afraid of
delinquents, who thinks of the sisters and priests as a police force to
keep his own children protected, and the Sacraments as an insurance
policy against suffering in the life to come. A fearful view of the
Church. Yet it is to the Church we must go or starve for the bread of
life. It is the priest with his anointed hands who serves us in the
great moments of life and love and death throughout our lives.

Catspaws
---

Anther thing. As I passed through Texas there was an account in an El
Paso newspaper of Catholic gangs going over the border to fight
pro-Castro demonstrators. Was this a way of diverting their energies
into safe channels? Perhaps there would be no police action against a
gang of young toughs breaking up a meeting of Mexicans who were siding
with Castro. They could indulge their desire for fighting with impunity.
They were engaging in a holy war, they were fighting for religion, for
the "Faith," for "Holy Mother Church." But on the other hand they might
be catspaws building-up anti Castro sentiment to prepare for the defeat
of Castro and the taking back of the nationalized property. They might
be fighting the battle of the rich, of the American corporations.

St. Catherine of Sienna preached a Crusade, saying that it was better to
go fight the heathen and regain the holy land, than for the Italian
cities to be fighting among themselves. And on the other hand our Lord
said through her, "I have left myself in the midst of you, that what you
do for these, I will count as done for myself." And in this she was
thinking of the poor.

And St. Teresa of Avila prayed that before her nuns became rich and
lived in fine buildings, the walls would fall upon them and crush them.
Yet she accepted money from her brothers who went to the New World to
make their fortunes. Those fortunes were made by robbing the native
population, enslaving them, even wiping them out completely (after
baptizing them and anointing them first perhaps.) Hard not to be
cynical, hard not to judge. Fr. John J. Hugo said that one could go to
hell imitating the imperfections of the saints. He also said that we
loved God as much as the one we loved the least. What a hard and painful
thing it is to love the exploiter. When I was interviewed by Mike
Wallace on television, and he asked me, "Do you think God loves a Hitler
and a Stalin?" I could only quote, "God loves all men. God wills that
all men be saved."

One needs to read Raissa Maritain's essay on the Development of
Conscience in the Old Testament since the time of Abraham," published in
**The Bridge**.

I realize that such a piece of writing as this is more like a meditation
than a carefully worked out article, and I hope our readers will forgive
me. It is because so many of them have asked me why we printed former
articles about Cuba. After all, I am the editor of a monthly paper,
presenting a point of view, about what is going on in the world, and
these events are vital happenings. They are matters of life and death.
Our lives, the salvation of souls depend upon our thoughts, words and
deeds in relation to them. Certainly our peace of mind does.

Down in South America, during Adlai Stevenson's recent visit, the heads
of State indicated that they did not wish to interfere with the Castro
regime which had to work out its own salvation in fear and trembling.

While these events are going on in Cuba there have been stirring events
in Africa, in Laos. It is because Cuba is only 90 miles away and has now
become a Socialist State that its is pertinent to write about it. But
one must write also in the light of world history, and all that has
happened in these stirring times. "It is not time for anyone to be
mediocre," Pius XI said.

Yesterday I got a postal from Mike Gold, Communist columnist for
the*Sunday Worker,*who is now in Moscow. I have known Mike since he and
I were eighteen and twenty. His wife is a French woman and we collect
rocks and seaweed and shells on her occasional visits. Once they came
with their two sons, and played French Christmas carols on their
recorders for us, and once he brought me a poster of St. Anne of
Brittany to hang in our dining room at the farm. (St. Anne, pray for
them.) Mike has diabetes and he writes:

"I was invited by the Writers' Union here for a visit. Liz and I are
also being given one of the famed 'cures.' They can't give one a new
body but they sure restore some of the life juices. Our next stop is a
sanitarium on the Black Sea--the water and the sun cure. All the best,
Mike (friend of socialized medicine and Soviet Humanism.)"

Another friend said recently, "my son is studying medicine and another
son the violin. I will have to work a long time to educate them. If they
were in Russia they would have the best; they are such gifted children."

Another friend: "the only way my children can get a college education is
by entering the armed forces."

Fr. Joseph Becker, S.J., an old friend, told me as I passed through St.
Louis that unemployment would increase, that there would be an
increasing number of unemployables due to automation, and only those
with a college education, and training in their chosen fields would be
able to get work. Man needs work as he needs bread.

The Problem
---

So here we have the problem. The education of the people. Fifty percent
of Cuba's millions were illiterate. No wonder Castro had to talk for so
many hours at a time, giving background and painting a picture of what
they were aiming at, for a multitude who could not read. He has pleaded
for peaceful co-existence, and he has said that the Church has endured
under the Roman empire, under a feudal system, under monarchies,
empires, republics and democracies. Why cannot she exist under a
socialist state? He has asked the priests to remain to be with their
people and a goodly number of Jesuits, God bless them, have elected to
remain and do parish work instead of run schools. They know what it is
to be persecuted and even by Churchmen too. They were suppressed by the
Pope; expelled from Spain, in their own history.

The word socialism has many meanings and Martin Buber used it one way in
his great book (now a paper back) **Paths in Utopia**. In Russia it is
understood as Marxist socialism as opposed to Utopian Socialism. And
"atheism is an integral part of Marxism," Lenin said. If this is the
type of socialism which will be taught in Cuban schools which are
springing up all over the island, of course we are against it. But there
is an atheistic capitalism too, and atheistic materialism which is more
subtle and more deadly. The former editor of the *Osservatore Romano* has
called attention to this cancer on our social body. Certainly we have
kept God out of our own school system here in the United States. What is
worst of all is **using** God and religion to bolster up our own greed,
our own attachment to property and putting God and country on an
equality.

We are certainly not Marxist socialists nor do we believe in violent
revolution. Yet we do believe that it is better to revolt, to fight, as
Castro did with his handful of men, he worked in the fields with the
cane workers and thus gained them to his army--than to do nothing.

We are on the side of the revolution. We believe there must be new
concepts of property, which is proper to man, and that the new concept
is not so new. There is a Christian communism and a Christian capitalism
as Peter Maurin pointed out. We believe in farming communes and
cooperatives and will be happy to see how they work out in Cuba. We are
in correspondence with friends in Cuba who will send us word as to what
is happening in religious circles and in the schools. We have been
invited to visit by a young woman who works in the National Library in
Havana and we hope some time we will be able to go. We are happy to hear
that all the young people who belong to the sodality of our Lady in the
U. S. are praying for Cuba and we too join in prayer that the pruning of
the mystical vine will enable it to bear much fruit. God Bless the
priests and people of Cuba. God bless Castro and all those who are
seeing Christ in the poor. God bless all those who are seeking the
brotherhood of man because in loving their brothers they love God even
though they deny Him.

We reaffirm our belief in the ultimate victory of good over evil, of
love over hatred and we believe that the trials which beset us in the
world today are for the perfecting of our faith which is more precious
than gold.

"Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice you just and be jubilant all you
upright of heart." Because "All the way to heaven is heaven, because He
has said, 'I am the Way.'"
