% Peter Maurin 1877-1977
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1977, 1, 9.

*Summary: Recounts her first meeting with Peter Maurin in 1932, his
teaching style, his personal example, and his platform for the Catholic
Worker: "Roundtable Discussions, Houses of Hospitality and Farming
Communes--those were the three planks in Peter Maurin's platform." (DDLW
\#256).*


When I first saw Peter Maurin my impression was of a short,
broad-shouldered workingman with a high, broad head covered with graying
hair. His face was weatherbeaten, he had warm grey eyes and a wide,
pleasant mouth. The collar of his shirt was dirty, but he had tried to
dress up by wearing a tie and a suit which looked as though he had slept
in it. (As I found out afterward, indeed he had.)

What struck me first about him was that he was one of those people who
talked you deaf, dumb and blind, who each time he saw you began his
conversation just where he had left off at the previous meeting, and
never stopped unless you begged for rest, and that was not for long. He
was irrepressible and he was incapable of taking offense.

The night I met Peter I had come from an assignment for **The
Commonweal,**covering the Communist-inspired "hunger march" of the
unemployed to Washington. I had prayed at the Shrine of the Immaculate
Conception, on the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, that I might find
something to do in the social order besides reporting conditions. I
wanted to change them, not just report them, but I had lost faith in
revolution, I wanted to love my enemy, whether capitalist or Communist.

I certainly did not realize at first that I had my answer in Peter
Maurin. I was thirty-five years old and I had met plenty of radicals in
my time and plenty of crackpots, too; people who had blueprints to
change the social order were a dime a dozen around Union Square.

At that time Peter Maurin was fifty-seven, had never married, had been
"away from the Church" in his youth, had worked with Sangnier and his
social studies group in Paris, and had sold its paper, **Le Sillon.**He
believed in going to the people in town and countryside, because first
of all he was of the people himself.

He was born in a tiny hamlet in the southern part of France, 200 miles
from Barcelona, one of a family of 24 children. His own mother had died
after she had borne her fifth child, and his stepmother had had 19 and
was still alive, he said.

`'I did not like the idea of revolution," he once told me. "I did not
like the French revolution, nor the English revolution. I did not wish
to work to perpetuate the proletariat. I never became a member of a
union, even though here in America I did all kinds of hard labor. I was
always interested in the land and man's life on the land. That is why I
went homesteading in Canada, but after two years, after my partner was
killed in a hunting accident, I went around Canada with work gangs and
entered this country in 1911, where I have been ever since."

When I first knew Peter, I was busy at a research job which kept me at
the library until three in the afternoon. When I got home to my little
apartment on East Fifteenth Street, I'd find him there waiting for me,
ready to indoctrinate, to give me a lesson in history from the Catholic
point of view. He had been sent to me, he said, by George Shuster, later
president of Hunter College, who at that time was editor of**The
Commonweal.**George thought that we were alike in point of view, both
interested in changing the social order and in reaching the masses with
the social teaching of the Church.

I had been a Catholic only about four years, and Peter, having suggested
that I get out a paper to reach the man in the street, started right in
on my education; he was a born teacher, and any park bench, coffee shop
counter, bus or lodging house was a place to teach. He believed in
starting on a program at once, without waiting to acquire classroom or
office or meeting hall. To reach the man in the street, you went to the
street. Peter was literal.

I had met Peter in December, 1932, and the first issue of **The Catholic
Worker**came out in time for the May Day celebration in Union Square,
1933. What Peter Maurin was interested in was the publication of his
essays, and my journalistic sense led me to report conditions as they
were, to paint a picture of poverty and destitution, homelessness and
unemployment, in short, to so arouse the conscience that the reader
would be willing and ready to listen to Peter when he talked about
things as they should be.


## Things as They Should Be

Peter was very much afraid of class war, and after his first essays were
published he could not quite understand why I wrote so much about
interracial injustice, hard conditions of labor, inadequate housing. He
much preferred to write about how things should be--Houses of
Hospitality for the needy, charity exercised in every home, voluntary
poverty and the works of mercy, farming communes and agronomic
universities that would teach people to earn a living by the sweat of
their own brows instead of someone else's.

The Catholic Worker was financed like the publications of any radical
"splinter group." If we had had a mimeograph machine, it would have been
a mimeographed paper. But we had nothing but my typewriter, so we took
our writing to a printer, found out it would cost \$57 to get out 2,500
copies of a small, eight-page sheet the size of **The Nation,**and
boldly had it set up. There were no office, no staff, no mailing list. I
had a small pay-check coming in for the research job which was just
finishing; two checks were due for articles I had written, but these
were needed to pay overdue rent and light bills. Father Joseph McSorley,
the Paulist, paid me generously for a small job of bibliography which I
did for him; the late Father Ahearn, pastor of a black church in Newark,
gave me ten dollars; Sister Peter Claver gave me one dollar which
someone had just given her. Those were our finances. We took that first
issue of the paper into Union Square that May Day and sold it for one
penny a copy to Communists and trade unionists.

Peter slept in the back of **The Catholic Worker**office, and he soon
brought in an Armenian anarchist poet and a German agnostic to share his
quarters with him and to provide sparring partners for round-table
discussions. He never took part in any of the work of the paper, except
to turn in each month half a dozen "easy essays," many of which he
insisted that we repeat over and over again. He was the kind of teacher
who believed in repetition, restatement, and the continual return to
first principles. He loved, however, to see visitors, and, if none came
into the office, he went out into the highways and byways and found
them.

The only time Peter got excited was when he found others agreeing with
him approving his ideas. Then his voice would rise, his eyes would shine
and he would shout out exultingly. He always expected so much in the way
of results that I often felt called upon to put a damper on him, to tone
down his optimistic enthusiasms. But I soon noticed that he was never
depressed or discouraged by disappointments or failures.

A failure such as that of the first round-table discussion was an
example. Peter had hoped for great results from a series of Sunday
afternoon discussions he had planned. Optimistically, for the first one
he rented the ballroom of the Manhattan Lyceum, where trade union
conventions as well as balls were often held. Only twenty people showed
up; they gathered around the speaker's table and had an uproarious
discussion on political action **versus**Catholic Action. After that,
Peter rented a small meeting room. The waste of money, laboriously
collected, did not bother him. There was plenty of money in the world,
he believed. What was needed was men and women absorbed by the right
ideas. Given the people, the money would follow. All one needed to do
was to pray. When bills piled up and creditors came, we used to go to
church and pray, all of us taking turns, and we called this "the
picketing of St. Joseph." Once when I asked an unemployed chambermaid if
she would take a half-hour of "picketing Saint Joseph" over at Precious
Blood Church, she asked me if she was to carry a sign. Once the printer
sent us his bill with the notation, "Pray and pay!"

I asked Peter several times if he were not disappointed at the lack of
success in indoctrinating the man on the street. I pointed to various
examples of those who came to stay with us and whose condition seemed to
get worse instead of better.

## Getting Down to the Roots

"People are just beginning to realize how deep-seated the evil is," he
said soberly. "That is why we must be Catholic Radicals, we must get
down to the roots. That is what radicalism is--the word means getting
down to the roots."

Peter, even in his practicality, tried to deal with problems in the
spirit of "the Prophets of Israel and the Fathers of the Church." He saw
what the Industrial Revolution had done to human beings and he did not
think that unions and organizations, strikes for higher wages and
shorter hours, were going to be the solution. "Strikes don't strike me,"
he used to say when we went out to a picket line to distribute
literature during a strike. But he came with us to hand out the
literature--leaflets which dealt with men and women's dignity and their
need and right to associate themselves with their fellows in trade
unions, in credit unions, cooperatives, maternity guilds, etc.

He was interested in far more fundamental approaches. He liked the name
"radical" and he had wanted the paper to be called **The Catholic
Radical.**To him, **Worker**smacked of class war. What he wanted was to
instill in all, worker or scholar, a philosophy of poverty and a
philosophy of work.

He was the layman always. I mean that he never preached; he taught.
While decrying secularism, the separation of the material from the
spiritual, his emphasis as a layman, was on our material needs, our need
for work, food, clothing and shelter. Though Peter went weekly to
confession and daily to Communion and spent an hour a day in the
presence of the Blessed Sacrament, his study was of the material order
around him. Though he lived in the city, he urged a return to the
village economy, the study of the crafts and of agriculture. He was
dealing with this world, in which God has placed us to work for a new
heaven and a new earth wherein justice dwelleth.

He constantly urged individuals to practice the corporal and spiritual
works of mercy; he urged Bishops to establish Houses of Hospitality.
Somehow the two planks of the program got mixed up. I can remember well
enough how it happened. He had written a series of essays addressed to
the Bishops, pointing out to them that canon law called for the
establishment of hospices in every bishopric. When a reader who had been
sleeping in the subway came into**The Catholic Worker**office one day
and disclosed her need (the apartment and the office were already full),
Peter's literal acceptance of "If thy brother needs food or drink, feed
him, and if he needs shelter, shelter him" meant that we rented a large
apartment a block away which became the first House of Hospitality for
women. Now we have two houses, on First St. and Third St. Here the works
of mercy are still being practiced by the group who get out **The
Catholic Worker,**living without salaries, in voluntary poverty.
"Feeding thy brother" started with feeding a few poor men. It became a
daily breadline in 1936, and the line still forms every day outside the
door.

Round-table Discussions, Houses of Hospitality and Farming
Communes--those were the three planks in Peter Maurin's platform. There
are still Houses of Hospitality, each autonomous but inspired by Peter,
each trying to follow Peter's principles. And there are farms, all
different but all starting with the idea of the personalist and
communitarian revolution--to use Emmanuel Mounier's phrase. Peter was
not disappointed in his life's work. He had given everything he had and
he asked for nothing, least of all for success. He gave himself, and--at
the end--God took from him the power to think.

He was anointed at Easton for a bad heart condition, and a few years
later, on May 15, 1949, he died at Maryfarm in Newburgh, New York.
Garbed in a donated suit of clothes, he was buried in a donated grave in
St. John's Cemetery, Brooklyn.

Obituaries were found not only in **The Industrial Worker,**a Chicago
I.W.W. paper which was on the subversive list, but also in **Osservatore
Romano**in Vatican City, which carried its notice on the front page.

God has taken him into Paradise, with Lazarus who once was poor. May He
bring us, too, to a place of refreshment, light and peace.

(This article is slightly revised from the preface to the 1961 edition
of THE GREEN REVOLUTION. Eds. note. )
