% Neighborhood Council In Action
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, Sept 1933, 2.

*Summary: The depression era story of helping a poor woman find and move
into a new apartment after being evicted by a heartless landlord for
failure to pay rent. (DDLW \#268).*

Early in the morning of August 10, Dorothy Weston, Begonia Jimenez and I
went over to Mrs. N.'s house to see about her moving. The Marshal was
due to come at ten and put her on the street and she didn't want her
belongings exposed to the neighborhood. The Unemployed Council
(Communist) is interested in making demonstrations and shows up only
when the furniture is on the street, so we were trying to be the first
on the scene.

With the assistance of Fred Schilling and Raymond Vallely of East 15th
Street, we were ready to move her, and the janitor of the house where
she was living recommended a house further down the street where the
agent was not, she said, so brutal.

The jainitress in the new house had lived there twenty-one years and
while she wrote out a receipt for us, we admired the rubber tree which
grew in a pot in her front room and reached all the way to the ceiling.

Mrs. N. makes her living by collecting rags and iron from ash cans and
selling them. She used to be a jainitress and received an apartment in
return for cleaning and taking care of two houses further down on the
east side. But she lost her job, and she is now sixty-two years old and
there is no chance of her finding anything else. She is all alone save
for a huge cat called Rags who is so old that he is toothless. When she
opened the door to our knock, he was lying on one of the pantry shelves,
looking down sedately and indifferently at the bustle of moving going on
around him. For her meals and his, Mrs. N. collects scraps from the
First Avenue market, picking up stale vegetables and scraps of meat and
fish heads. She does not like to ply her trade of collecting rags during
the day, so she sets out at night, continuing her work often until early
in the morning. Just the night before, the jainitress said, she had
brought in an iron bed and spring at twelve o'clock, making several
trips with them. She had had no bed before, sleeping on a bundle of rags
on the floor.

Her possessions consisted of trunks and a couple of large baskets of her
belongings, a table and chairs, a kitchen range and some kerosene lamps.

She had, used, of course, neither gas nor electricity, not being able to
afford these "public" utilities.

"But then most of the people don't use gas or electricity around here
and never have," the jainitress told us. "I always use a coal stove in
the summer and burn wood in it to cook with. I get wood from the Edison
people down by the river. They're always giving away free wood. They're
awfully good."

A Home Relief investigator stopped by the stoop for a chat. she heard us
talking about gas and electricity. "Yes, most of the people never used
gas and electric until the city was paying for it," she said
resentfully. She was stopping to leave a ticket for another woman who
had nine dogs. "And how I hate to leave a ticket for a woman with nine
dogs," she lamented. "When so many children need milk! But, goodness!
what can you do?"

"She's not so bad as most," our friend the jainitress commented as the
Home Relief worker went on down the street. "She's real good-hearted.
Now the last one they had was a mean thing in spectacles. She wouldn't
sit down in your house. 'I don't like bugs,' she'd say, and 'won't you
please dust off that chair and put it in the hall?'"

As we waited for the moving job to be done, the agent passed us by
blackly. Over the phone the day before he had said:

"I don't care if she has gone to the Home Relief. I wouldn't take their
vouchers anyway. They're no good, you can't cash them. Now we've got to
dispossess the people all over again and it's putting us to a lot of
expense."

We pointed out that it might be better to let them stay temporarily than
go to this expense. But the only reply was, "We carried them--let some
one else do it for a while." They had only carried them a month and a
half, we pointed out, but a grunt was the only answer.

"He's a mean one," the janitor whispered as he passed. "Know what he's
just gone and done? Cut down all the clothes lines on the roof this
morning! How are we going to hang our clothes out now?"

By this time the two boys had all but finished the moving job. Mrs. N.
had been transferred from one apartment to another with decency and
dispatch. For another month at least she can live without a harsh agent
forever at the door, bulldozing and threatening her with the streets.
