% Day by Day - January 1935
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1935, 3, 6.

*Summary: An account of their work: visitors, helping neighbors, selling
copies of the paper. Is grateful for the donations that seem to appear
at the most needed times, both money and services. Says they were smote
by a flea infestation. (DDLW \#284).*

Teresa was home for the holidays, perched like a little sparrow right at
my elbow as I typed on stories for this issue of the paper. She got a
microscope set for Christmas and the best place to be engaging in
scientific pursuits was usually right at the typewriter table by my
side.

"Perhaps," she would murmur to herself, "There'll be bugs in the ice-box
water . . . Here is a slide with some of Tom's blood on it . . . It's
not much good . . . Don't you want to look at a butterfly scale? And
don't forget to write in the paper that I went picketing with you on
December 31 . . . That's a hot one! Why don't you want me to say 'That's
a hot one.' I like to say it . . . You won't let me say 'Come over and
see me some time.' So I'm going to say 'that's a hot one.'"

## \* \* \*

Going on the ferry over to Staten Island to take Teresa back to St.
Patrick's where she is going to school, the gulls stood out white
against the grey sky. They swept and glided, swooping down into the
water now and then after a fish. Their cries and the sound of the water
as the boat churned through it were the only sounds in the winter
stillness. Then there was the walk with Teresa up the country road, past
a thicket of birches with the blue green twilight sky behind them. To
one side of the ground was a field of yellow grass, bent by a soft wind.
Across one of the fields alongside a path through the cold-baked fields,
there was a little brook gurgling cheerfully beneath the ice that caked
it. There are still green things showing under the stubble of the
fields, bits of wild carrot, the green of vines, even some wild
geranium. And as the earth lost its color and darkened, there was still
the radiance of a sunset flushing the sky.

## \* \* \*

The work continues back in the office until late in the evening.
Visitors from Chicago, from Maryland, from New Hampshire, from Buffalo.
A worker from one of the chain stores who tells us about his long
day--he gets up at five-thirty to assist at early mass, and he is never
through with his work until seven-thirty in the evening. He wants to
help us by distributing the paper on Sundays . . . A man comes in from
East Eleventh Street to tell us how the paper has reinforced his faith,
and to bring us some clothes for those that are poorer than he, and he
is poor enough . . . All day there are the unemployed, starting at
eight-thirty. They want underwear, shoes, coats, information about home
relief . . . Or they just want to talk to us. There are the unemployed
all day, and in the evening there are those who work and have no other
time to come. So if the paper is rather disjointed and unfinished in its
writing, it is because there is so much to do for twelve hours, and only
a few of the left over hours to write about the work and the thought
behind the work.

## \* \* \*

As for our immediate assistants and co-workers--they continue faithfully
in their voluntary cooperation. Two or three are always picketing,
running errands, addressing envelopes, going to the post office, paying
calls in the neighborhood, taking care of the needs of those that come
in. The girls from the House of Hospitality helped us picket on the
Feast of Our Lady of Guadalupe, and when they came in that morning to go
with us to the high mass which started the day's work, they told us how
four of them said the rosary aloud together the night before for our
persecuted fellow-workers in Mexico City.

During the month there was a call of distress from a man whose wife had
just gone to the hospital to have her sixth child. His mother was to
have taken care of the other five children, but the very next day she
fell off a chair and broke her arm, so the little ones were left to the
care of the nine-year-old girl. The father found it impossible to get
any help so an appeal was made to the Catholic Worker. One of the girls
co-operating with us volunteered for the job and took charge of the
little household. It meant ten days of good hard work, what with one of
the little ones, two years old, being sick. There was washing and
ironing and cleaning to do, besides the marketing and cooking. A few of
the afternoons some of the boys from the office went up to take care of
the kids while she did the shopping. One of those who volunteered for
this work was a seminarian on his vacation. He will make a good
Franciscan, that boy. The girl had gone out on the job as an errand of
mercy, not expecting any pay, but both the man and his wife insisted
that she be paid and paid generously. She had been jobless for some
time, so it came in handy. He had been out of work for quite a time,
too, and money was hard-earned in that big family, but it is the poor
who are the most generous and the most appreciative. "I had not been
able to find anyone to help us for love nor money," he told us.

## \* \* \*

The young man who is studying to be a Franciscan came in almost every
day to get papers to sell in Union Square and he disposed of about a
hundred and fifty a day. Other volunteers who help in the office also
sold papers every day during the Christmas rush, and one of them got rid
of as many as four hundred an afternoon and evening.

Let us say here that any unemployed men or girls, either, for that
matter (for one of the girls from the co-operative apartment sold a good
many), who wish to sell the Catholic Worker may call at the office for
copies.

## \* \* \*
In case any of those kind friends who were good Samaritans and sent in
clothes were not thanked this month, lay it to the fact that the need
was so great that the packages were opened, the contents distributed and
the wrappings disposed of by zealous workers before the editors had a
chance to grab the return address in order to write letters of
thanksgiving. We are very sorry, indeed, at our seeming negligence, but
believe us that we are not ungrateful, and from the bottom of our hearts
we beg God to bless those kind and thoughtful ones who are helping us so
much.

## \* \* \*

Someone wrote to us that they were always interested in hearing how the
printing bill got paid--how we made out during the month. Well, it was a
good month and we look back to last Christmas when we were so poor that
we had to skip our January edition, and we praise the Lord and all His
saints for the abundance this year. Christmas cards came to us enclosing
money and little by little the bills were paid. The telephone was almost
shut off, but wasn't, the electric man came around to deprive us of
light, but didn't (there had been an offering through the mail), there
were a few meals of beans, and then a basket of food came in; and we
were preparing to put off the January edition until late in the month
when a generous check came in from a priest whom we would name except
that we are afraid he would get sore, and so that bill was paid off and
there was still twenty-five dollars in the bank.

This morning our dentist who has been taking care of everybody for
nothing the last year called up and said that the marshal was on his
door step, and miraculously enough there was twenty dollars for him. He
had pulled a dozen teeth and filled another dozen and still he said his
bill was only fifteen. We gave him what we had, however, and we are sure
that somehow or other there will be enough money to pay for the mailing
of the paper. It's true that only seventy-five cents came in today, but
we have absolute faith in God's bounty. He scatters his gifts so
lavishly that He will supply our wants, we know.

We're so sure of it in fact that this is not even being written in the
form of an appeal, but just by way of comment as to how we're making
out. If we were behind hand, and we felt we had to be importunate (as
our Lord bids us to be when there is need), we would put this in ten
point type and run it at the top of the editorial page. As it is, this
is only a modest accounting, and a thanksgiving.

Having been given a bottle of perfume for Christmas and thus indulged
one of our senses, which is accustomed to being mortified, we predicted
that we would be tormented in other fashions, the devil being busy
around these parts in many little ways. Not because there are any idle
hands but because the Lord's work goes on so busily.

Sure enough, an epidemic of fleas smote us (we hasten to assure our
visitors that they are gone now) and mortification abounded.

A Spanish friend who delights in St. Teresa brought us, for our solace,
a poem written by the great saint for her sisters to sing in such
afflictions. We hope it helped them as much as it helped us. Please
excuse the rough translation.

Daughters who take up the cross

Have valor,

And of Jesus, who is your light,

Ask for help.

He will be your defender in such a pass.

*Refrain:*

Free from the evil tribe

This robe.

These bad cattle disquiet

In prayer,

The soul badly grounded

In devotion,

But keep your heart set

On God.

*Refrain:*

Free from the evil tribe

This robe.

As you are born to die

Do not dismay,

And for such uncivil ones

Have no fear.

A help in God you will find

In so great an evil.

*Refrain:*

Free from this evil tribe

This robe.

Since you gave us a new gown,

Celestial King,

Free from the evil tribe

This robe.
