% Day After Day - April 1935
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1935, 3.

*Summary: Description of her daughter's ninth birthday party and the
child's Lenten mortifications. Notes the aim of Lent is to keep united
to God through the suffering Humanity of His son. (DDLW \#287).*

On the Riviera the munition makers made merry in their serious way last
month. Agents of Krupp and Schneider, Humbert de Wendel and others were
present. Says *Time*, the weekly news magazine, "Ostensibly the 107
delegates of Europe's munitioneers were meeting as the International
Railmakers' Association, and on the Riviera was that blithe
international railmaker, Charles M. Schwab. Explained he: 'My doctors
say I react favorably to the excitement of roulette.'"

- - -

We suppose the foregoing paragraph contains the pungent material desired
by one of our correspondents last month. There's plenty of it to fill
the paper, but we, too, "retreat" from such current events to recall
occurrences of the month in a more cheerful vein.

There was Teresa's birthday party for instance. She was nine years old
on the fourth of March, and there was a party, of course, up in the
Harlem quarters with twenty-one of the little children who have been
attending the classes there. First, there was a show and everyone sang
with great willingness and afterwards there was a feast when tremendous
quantities of cake and candy were consumed. The boxes of ice cream were
like the widow's cruze in that they kept replenishing plates so that
there were even some third helpings. One little girl got slightly ill,
but otherwise there were no casualties. Little Lizzie, who was more
discreet, took part of the cake home for her "poor old mother." Lizzie,
who started off the singing of the afternoon was overcome with giggles
at first, but she ended up gayly, singing all the popular songs with
much verve.

## \*\*\*

The names of the children who attended the party were, as [far as] Ade
Bethune can remember, Dorothy, Hattie, Bernard and Rudy Charles; Louise
Jeminot; Lizzie; Alice Mabin; Alice Foster; Aurora Foster; Bernice and
Elinore Thomas; another little girl by the name of Elinor; a Bobby; a
William, and Mary, Helen, Catherine, Christina, Georgia and Rosie
Giogas.

## \*\*\*

Teresa, this Sunday afternoon, was full of the excitement of counting up
her mortifications for Lent. She was beginning well, with zest and
enthusiasm. What were her mortifications? Eggs and candy and silence.
The first you eat, the second you don't eat (but you are allowed cookies
even with icing on them), and the third--well, silent periods one must
learn to enjoy because of offering them up. These mortifications were
for the convent life in general. During school hours there were
sacrifices such as not looking out the window--and that is a tremendous
one considering the forty days of Lent and spring on its way, and maple
trees budding and starlings calling and two friendly old crows cheering
the spring together.

Only yesterday, too, she looked out and soldiers were going down the
country road and sacrifices and mortifications were forgotten in the joy
of watching the marchers.

But in general, in the first flush of Lent, the struggle is undertaken
bravely.

What if during the long weeks the fervor lessens and the work of
accumulating graces was continued with many lapses, but by effort of
will.

That time when *will* has to be brought into play is perhaps the most
important of all, despite failures and the total lack of a sense of
accomplishment, of growth.

Fervor comes again with Holy Week, joy comes on the day of resurrection,
with all nature singing exultantly God's praises.

To keep united to God through the suffering Humanity of His son--that is
the aim of Lent.
