% Florence Is A Communist
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1938, 1, 2.

*Summary: Lauds the courage of a Southern household maid who became a
Communist hoping for a better social order. Notes the degradation of
cottons workers and prods Catholics to become lay apostles to help build
up a new social order. (DDLW \#329).*

Florence is the young maid in the home of a sodality leader in New
Orleans where I stayed last month on my way back to New York. Part of
the work of the sodalists throughout the country is to combat Communism
by the positive program of the Church and so the word Communism came up
during dinner conversations.

Florence had just recently come down from the deep South and she was not
yet trained to the niceties of waiting on table and pretending not to
hear what was being said.

"Are you a lecturer?" she wanted to know, and, "What do you lecture
about?"

"Labor and Communism and things like that," my hostess answered her, and
added, "Do you know what Communism is, Florence?"

"Yes, I am a Communist," Florence stated, and afterward when we were
alone together in the kitchen she went into more details about her
beliefs.

Communist's Work
----------------

"Communism," she stated, "is to help the poor." So the poor of the small
town of Jacobi where she came from, were quite ready to be enrolled in
the ranks of the Communists.

There were about eighty Negroes signed up with the Communist group in
her little town in Louisiana, and in the neighboring towns of
Lettsworth, Lagonia, Batchelor, Torras and Susport there were groups of
from forty to sixty in each town.

They were not doing anything much at present, not even meeting, she
explained, since the young Communist organizer who had been keeping
contact with them had been jailed and run out of town. He had been
transferred by the Party to another state, so there the matter was
halted.

But the groups had literature and some of them read. They went to
Church, they believed in God, but they knew that this present social
order in which they and their neighbors never had enough to eat or a
decent place to live, was not a good social order. They could readily
see that they must do their part to help bring about a better order.
What that part was they did not know as yet, but they were organized,
and they read and thought and waited.

Cotton A Curse
--------------

According to a government "cross section survey" made by the Department
of Agriculture of people employed as farm laborers, the average annual
earnings of female cotton pickers in Louisiana was $62 a season. The
men averaged $178 a season.

Granville Chapman in a communication from Texas to the New York Times
stated, " Cotton is the curse of the South. I hate it because of what it
does to the childrenâ€¦.It is much too hard, too exhausting work for the
children." But the schools close so that they can continue to work in
the fields to supplement the earnings of their parents.

Down in the section that Florence comes from men, women and children
work in the cotton and sugar cane. They are degraded to a condition
worse than that of slaves, because slaves were better cared for. The
condition of the whites is just as bad.

St. Thomas said that a modicum of goods is necessary for men to lead a
good life, and they want that modicum of goods. The very fact that they
are organizing shows that they realize their dignity as men, as
creatures of body and soul, as temples of the Holy Ghost.

Where are the lay apostles among Catholics who will run the risk this
Communist organizer did in gathering together groups to help build up
the new social order the Holy Father calls for?
