% Visitors Criticism, CIO Convention
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1938, 1, 4.

*Summary: Collection of little stories: visitors, helping Tamar with
homework, praying to St. Joseph for money, reading *Pelle the
Conqueror*, and attending a CIO convention. Affirms her "faith in the
tremendous spiritual capacities of man." (DDLW \#336).*

DAY AFTER DAY

We are having so many visitors this month that we sleep in shifts. For a
while we put up four of them in one of the Bowery hotels but even that
was too expensive,--thirty cents a night each. The place was clean, they
said, but noisy. Our visitors are Bob Walsh, head of the **Catholic
Worker** activities in England, John Cogley, editor of the Chicago
Catholic Worker, Martin Paul, also Chicago; Ray Nagle and Larry Heeney
and Mike Strasser, all from Milwaukee; Dave Dunne and Anna Echele from
St. Louis. The last two were on the farm, not here in town more than a
week.

Last night I read the third book of a series about Therese Neumann, the
German mystic, by a German writer. There was a rumor going the rounds
that she has been confined recently to a concentration camp because she
stated that Hitler was possessed by the devil. The book I read was most
impressive, increasing the joy and thanksgiving and awe in one's heart
at the thought of Christ's gift of Himself to us in Holy Communion.

Homework
---

Tamar is going to school on Mott street this year. I am making no
speaking trips and welcome this opportunity we have to be together There
is Mass together in the morning, a brief lunch at noon, and after school
there is often time for a walk down to the park or the river or the
library. It makes us both very happy. I check over her homework at night
and find I have a hard time doing it myself. What is solstice, for
instance? Use the words "analysis" and "allotment" in sentences. The
only sentences I could think of were provocative. "An analysis of
Fascism shows that it is anti-Catholic," was one. "Has Mussolini given
allotments to the widows of the men who were killed in Ethiopia?" But I
am afraid those sentences would not sound like Tamar.

Criticism
---

There was a peculiarly delicate work of mercy to be performed today and
this evening I was thinking conversationally with St. Joseph: "That work
was performed for you, St. Joseph. I have 'given away an onion.' Please
won't you concentrate on our very bad plight right now and nudge
somebody so that they will remember to send us some money for our
bills?" But I was ashamed at this give and take idea and did not pursue
the conversation.

Undoubtedly he is helping us, as he sees fit. I shall keep asking him
for help every day, knowing that it will come. I do not need to boast
and say, "That was a specially hard job. You must repay me."

David Gordon was in the other day telling us with his peculiar Hebrew
intensity how we all deserved to go to hell, me especially, and accusing
us of self glorification, pride and self love. Although I do not find
many points of agreement with him in his other attitudes, I must admit
that we are apt to have such sins hidden deep within us. Criticism never
comes a bit amiss. If it is unjust, then we probably deserve it on some
other count and are not getting it.

"Pelle"
---

Looking over *Pelle the Conqueror* again, I still find it the best
proletarian novel I have ever read. Anderson-Nexo has become a
Communist, they say, but this novel was written back in 1910 or
thereabouts and is about the cooperative movement in Denmark. That does
not make it sound very interesting, but the thousand pages of the life
of Pelle, taking him through his childhood on the farm, his
apprenticeship in town, his labor organizing in Copenhagen, and finally
his building up of a cooperative group are the best reading I have seen
for some time. The book teems with characters, and the description of
life in the "Ark," a huge ramshackle tenement, reminds me very much of
life on Mott Street.

Whenever I see books of James Farrell mentioned, I think we ought to
read Pelle. The contrast between Studs Lonergan and Pelle is like that
of darkness and daylight.

Which reminds me again of Gordon's criticism that we exalt the
proletariat. If we thought that man is such as Farrell describes him, we
would indeed feel pretty hopeless. But the thought of Pelle, glowing
with hope, with the desire for sacrifice, his great heart burning with
love for his fellows, is an encouragement.

We believe man to be "little less than the angels." But we also know
that he is capable of falling lower than the lowest beast. It is because
we have faith in the tremendous spiritual capacities of man that we are
doing this work.

C.l.O.
---

Attended the CIO state convention at the Center Hotel, the first to be
held. Such conventions are always different in New York to those held in
any other city. With all the rush of union activity today, there is
little cohesion and the meeting gave all the appearance of being what
most meetings are, disorganized rather than organized strength. Michael
Quill was there, seemingly much disturbed by the accusation before the
Dies Committee that he was a member of the Communist party. He showed
his disturbance like a child. Although I am not sympathetic with his way
of rabble-rousing at strike meetings (the crowd loves him) I do think
that he has done a good job of organizing the transit workers, a job
which needed to be done. I heard him speak at the Hippodrome once and he
spoke of the barricades and the clenched fist and the crowd roared its
joy. Brophy and Bridges are quieter speakers by far and do not get such
plaudits, but they are far more effective. Of my own knowledge I do not
know whether or not Quill is a Communist (the credibility of witnesses
may be doubted) but I do know that he is a force for either good or evil
and in those things he is doing well he should be helped.

Also as Peter Favre, the great Jesuit, said: "It is necessary that one
who desires to be serviceable to heretics of this present age should
hold them in great affection and love them very truly, putting out of
his heart all thoughts and feelings that tend to their discredit. The
next thing he must do is to win their good will and love by friendly
intercourse and converse on matters about which there is no difference
between us, taking care to avoid all controversial subjects that lead to
bickering and mutual recrimination. The things that unite us ought to be
the first ground of our approach, not the things that keep us apart." M.
H. Fabri Monuments, P. 400.

After the meeting I had supper with John Brophy and we talked for an
hour and a half of the labor movement and the Church, of Berdyaev's
books, "Christianity and Class War," and the "End of Our Time," of the
new Brophy residence in Washington near the Catholic University and of
how pleasant it was to be with one's children instead of just
week-ending with them.
