% Day After Day - December 1938
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1938, 1, 4.

*Summary: Attends a dinner in honor of Raissa Maritain and takes her to
a jazz club in Harlem. Compares the Mott Street neighborhood to a
village with small shops, sweet smells, generosity, troubles, pets. Asks
if someone can send a hedgehog to her daughter. (DDLW \#338).*

One night last month a group met at a dinner in honor of Madame Raissa
Maritain, who was returning to France the next day after a short visit
to New York and the Middle West. Harry McNeil, who is the chairman of
our Tuesday night forums, Dr. Ruth Byrnes, Dr. William O'Meara, Harry
Binsse and his wife, Mrs. Maritain's sister, and Emmanuel Chapman were
there and the conversation proceeded in French and English. Thanks to
Dr. McNeil, who is as much at home in conversational French as he is in
English, it was a most pleasant dinner for me, who speak no French. The
others confessed they were more at ease discussing philosophy in French
than the trade union movement, for instance, in which Madame Maritain
was deeply interested.

Madame Maritain warmly recommended Borne and Henry's book, "The
Philosophy of Work," and said she and her husband were well acquainted
with the authors, who were students of his in Paris.

Theresa Neuman
---

The conversation shifted to Therese Neuman, about whom rumors are
circulating just now--rumors of her death, rumors that she is confined
to a concentration camp. Nobody had any definite information. Maritain
himself had visited the mystic and had been present during two of her
ecstacies and had been profoundly impressed. He had not had conversation
with her.

Both Maritain and his wife have a warm love for America and consider
that there are infinite possibilities here of working towards that
pluralist state which the philosopher has outlined in his first essay,
in "Freedom and the Modern World."

Madame Maritain expressed a deep interest in the Negro in this country
and the evening ended with a half hour visit to Harlem where we sat in
the Savoy and watched the dancers and listened to swing music. Being a
musician herself, Madame Maritain wished to hear first hand one of those
bands so publicized in European journals.

I was glad it was one of the big public dance halls we went to because
it was a place where workers gather after long hours of backbreaking
manual labor, where women who work as chambermaids, houseworkers, clerks
can go and forget their oppression in a few hours of lighthearted dance.
Some of the dancing was grotesque and even humorous, some was most
sedate. There was none that was objectionable as I had been afraid it
might be.

Winter Is Here
--------------

Finally we have taken to fires after a long and warm fall. All the women
in the House of Hospitality go out collecting wood from the neighborhood
around and the back yard rings with the sound of hatchets against not
only wood but concrete. Not so good for the hatchets.

The neighbors generously bring us all the grape crates after their
wine-making and the back yard was stacked for a couple of days. In the
morning, the cold penetrates and the men on the breadline have started
building fires to warm themselves. Mostly it is the trash in the street
that they are burning up. This morning, on the Feast of the
Presentation, there was a delicately joyous sunrise as though in honor
of the Blessed Mother. All pink, blue, pale lavender and gold and fleecy
clouds against a deep blue sky. Nothing somber nor magnificent as there
is so often in sunsets, but a display as though for a little girl of
three, dancing up the Temple steps as she was brought for the first time
to be put under instruction.

Neighborhood Crabs
------------------

After Mass, I stopped at a little dairy store around the corner of
Hester street and found them busily engaged in making cheese, stirring
it in a huge wooden bowl with a wooden ladle. The cheeses are pressed
and put in little wicker baskets. When you buy the cheese you don't get
the basket. Sometimes they press them into the shape of fat pigs,
graceful deer and horses. These are nice to put on the mantelpiece. They
harden and they do not smell.

Next door to the cheese store is a little bakery with the good smell of
bread and rolls perfuming the morning air. Between the hot bakery smells
and the rich smell of coffee from St. Joseph's House on a fall morning,
the early hours are often cheerful ones. Especially right now to us who
are beginning little by little, to pay off some of our bills. We don't
have to wonder desperately whether we are going to be able to keep up
the bread line, whether we are going to have to turn away those
expectant faces, looking to us so hopefully for hospitality in the
morning. "The best coffee ever served," they all say, and we agree with
them as we breakfast with a steaming cup of it and a roll.

Thank God for the little joys that come of a moment with a glimpse of a
sunrise shining down the canyons between the cliffs of tenements; with
the cup of hot coffee and the smell and the taste of good bread.

Friendly Baker
--------------

We visited one friendly baker down the street who has been giving us
whole gunny sacks of left-over bread. Down a steep flight of steps into
a white-washed cellar he has his one-man shop. The baker is owner, boss
and worker. He hires one man, a driver of a horse and wagon to deliver
the bread. The boss goes to work at nine in the evening and works until
eleven the next morning, mixing, kneading and baking the crusty loaves
in a long oven built in the end of the cellar.

The oven is heated with a little coal fire in one corner, and there is
an electric light inside so that you can see the long browning loaves of
bread which he dexterously slides in, turns and removes with a long
paddle and a twist of the wrist.

He is a Seventh Day Adventist and has texts hanging around the wall and
a package of tracts which he gives out to his customers. He has nothing
against the Catholics, he said. We should all love one another and that
is why he wishes to give us bread every day. He will teach us, too, how
to make bread, any night some of us want to come in, and he will even go
down to the farm at Easton to show us how to construct a big oven.

It is like a village, this neighborhood. There is a warmth and
friendliness, there are homes where people are born and live long years
until marriage, where they come back to feast and mourn, and from which
they are eventually buried.

But there are the ugly and sordid aspects only too evident always.
Overcrowded rooms, rat-ridden tenements, vermin against which one must
always fight, drink and drugs and vice, side by side with warm and
guarded homes.

Not long since there was a murder around on Mulberry street and when the
extras were shouted through the streets "Murder on Mott street," our
neighbors were insulted and would not buy the paper. The murder was on
Mulberry.

But, even so, when the shot was fired women rushed from their homes,
thinking of their husbands, sons and brothers. The man who was killed
had just been released from Sing Sing after serving a ten-year sentence.
One of the neighbors said sadly, "Almost every house on this street has
a boy in jail."

Pets
----

John Mella just came in while Teresa was doing her homework with a big
box containing a very dirty rabbit. He was white but much bedraggled and
his sad plight appealed to her immediately. A boy in the neighborhood
wanted to find a home for him and ours was to be it. After all, what was
St. Joseph's house but a house of hospitality! We have other rodents,
not pets, so why not a rabbit? He would go well with the two white mice.
So now while Teresa does her homework, the rabbit is exploring his new
box. He can get out whenever he wants to, but let us hope he does not
get into bed at night. He smells pretty strong at present but let us
hope that when he cleans himself up he will be a sweeter companion.

An hour later. Much to my relief three little Italian boys rushed in
just now and reclaimed their pet.

"What I really want," said Teresa, "is a hedgehog. They are little and
not at all prickly if you train them, and they are very bad for
cockroaches. But they like to curl up in garbage cans so you are liable
to throw them out if you are not careful."

Has anybody a hedgehog to send in to the **Catholic Worker**?
