% Catholic Worker Ideas On Hospitality
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1940, 10.

*Summary: Defends against the charge that they do more harm than good in
providing hospitality to the undeserving. Asserts that doing the Works
of Mercy is following Christ and a revolutionary technique. Points to
the monastic tradition of indiscriminate hospitality. Other keywords:
Communism, hospices, social order. (DDLW \#358).*

Many times we have borne the charge that Houses of Hospitality, this
"new wrinkle," do more harm than good. It is said that they perpetuate
chronic laziness and drunkenness. Communists ask us, "How can you say
you're against capitalism when you keep it alive by feeding the poor the
crumbs of the rich?" We are told to discriminate on the side of the
"deserving poor."

The "new wrinkle" was old long before we appeared on the scene. Christ
once told his disciples, "I was hungry and you gave me to eat, " etc.
Since that day, all over the world, pilgrims to holy places, weary
travelers, the hungry and thirsty, saint and sinner have been succored
in the name of Christ. Hospices, centuries ago, were under the
supervision of the Bishops. They were set up in lonely and hostile
regions. Lepers by the thousands were helped in the many hospices
scattered all over France. The monks of St. Bernard are famous for their
hospitality. The work of these monks was started back in 962.

The early monasteries founded by Benedict of Nursia designated monks as
hospitallers and almoners. The former welcomed guests while the latter
fed, clothed, and gave shelter to the needy.

"Chronics"
----------

There is no record in the history of hospices and hospitality of
discrimination. Those who disapprove feeding the "burdens of society"
might look to the work of the nuns and priests laboring among the
lepers. To bring it nearer, there is Father Dempsey of hallowed memory,
who could see through a man's drunkenness and evaluate him, liken him to
you and me, as another very precious entity, a creature of body and
soul.

Christ exercised His good works among those who today would be lumped
with "chronics." Hospitable in His heart, He took in the sinning woman
and the thief beside Him on the Cross.

As for perpetuating the social order, we consider the spiritual and
corporal Works of Mercy and the following of Christ to be the best
revolutionary technique and a means of changing the social order rather
than perpetuating it. Did not the thousands of monasteries, with their
hospitality change the entire social pattern of their day? They did not
wait for a paternal state to step in nor did they stand by to see
destitution precipitate bloody revolt.

Louis B. Ward, in BACK TO BENEDICT, says, "The poor did not have to sit
as they do today for endless hours on the benches of some welfare agency
to be subjected to a third degree on their personal lives, treated as
crooks and investigated to the point of criminal persecution." We have
often deplored this treatment of our poor and advocated means grounded
on the seven ways in which Christ was treated by His disciples. Not
bound by vows and being weak in ourselves, we try, stumblingly, to do
our little bit to express faith in the hospitable tradition.
