% C. W.'s Position
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1940, 1, 4.

*Summary: Excerpts from her testimony to Congress opposing conscription.
Extensive quotes from Church sources and others who argue that
conscription is against the natural right to free choice of work and
personal liberty of action. (DDLW \#363).*


Monsignor Decries Conscription Whip: 
Bids Senate Call on Patriotism for Defense Volunteers


(Testimony of [Rt. Rev.] G. Barry O'Toole, professor of philosophy in
the Catholic University of America, before the Senate Military Affairs
Committee.)

Gentlemen:

I come here not to speak for anyone, but to present a moral issue. If
might makes right and moral considerations are negligible, then what I
have to say is meaningless; if not, it is of paramount importance.

A year's service in the United States Army does not qualify me as an
expert, but it clears me of the charge of being a theorist.

To be a soldier is a vocation and no vocation should be imposed by law;
for it is a Christian principle that every man should be free in his
choice of a state of life.

It is my sincere hope that instead of enacting a law of compulsory
military training, the Federal Government will call upon the nation's
youth to enlist of their own accord.

What youthful America will be summoned to defend is the democratic
ideal.

Democracy, in American parlance, does not signify a form of government.
If it means anything, it means a conception or philosophy of government
founded in respect for the free will of the human individual. This God
Himself respects, and it is not for any government to trample upon it.

Each human being is a PERSON, that is to say a free, self-determining
agent, who is the originator of his own actions and therefore
responsible for them.

In view of his personal dignity, he is not to be treated as a soulless
tool nor to be kicked about like a football. He is God's own image, not
the pawn of any State.

God expects of him virtuous actions, and actions performed under
compulsion are not virtuous actions. Hence the coercive power of the
Government ought to be kept within such bounds as will leave ample room
for free choice–for voluntary virtue.

A single soldier who serves his country out of whole-hearted devotion is
worth a hundred military slaves driven to arms under the lash of
necessity.

The defeatists who despair of democracy will tell you that it is futile
to call for volunteers. If democracy is as bankrupt as all that, if the
only way to save it is to impose patriotism by force, let those who
believe as much "heil Hitler" and confess that he is right. But if we
still have faith that freedom and democracy represent the better way,
then in God's name let us give them a fair trial before we concede the
superiority of the totalitarian way.

C. W.'s Position
====

Following are excerpts from the direct testimony placed before the
Senate Committee on Military Affairs by representatives of The Catholic
Worker in supporting its stand against enactment of compulsory selective
military training legislation:

We take our stand opposing conscription on the ground that in addition
to imperiling man's natural and sacred rights, it constitutes an "armed
peace," the fallacy of which has been pointed out by Pope Pius XI. He
said in regard to it, "It is scarcely better than war itself, a
condition which tends to exhaust national finances, to waste the flower
of youth, to muddy and poison the very fountain heads of life, physical,
intellectual and moral."

Rev. E. Cahill, S.J., author of "The Framework of the Christian State,"
says that conscription laws tend to override man's personal rights.
"Man's natural right to free choice of work and to personal liberty of
action are suspended, and other rights still more sacred are violated
and endangered. Besides, owing to the immense power which the
conscription laws put into the hands of a bureaucracy, one can easily
understand how almost every human right of the individual citizen is
imperiled."

Bishop John Duffy, of Buffalo, said: "Just as soon as a million men are
under arms in the United States, at that moment does America become a
totalitarian state and no power of democracy can change it. Let us bring
back God, not imitate the foreign program of blood."

Monsignor Barry O'Toole, of the Catholic University in Washington, in
one of a series of eight articles in The Catholic Worker began his
articles by stating, "Universal conscription, that is, compulsory
enrollment of the able-bodied men in a nation, is one of the disastrous
brood of evils spawned by the French Revolution."

Real League of Nations
----------------------

We urge Catholics not to lose sight of universal international
disarmament as something to be worked for in setting up a real league of
nations. Remember the words of Cardinal Gasparri, who wrote in 1917,
"For the Holy See, the only system which is practical and which further
could be applied easily with a little good will on both sides, would be
the following: to suppress, by a common agreement, among civilized
nations, compulsory military training."

We protest the use of national wealth in the mad race to increase
armaments, the expenditure of billions when millions of our citizens are
in need and hunger.

We pledge ourselves to oppose the passing of any conscription or
"selective service" law.

We fear conscription is a direct threat for the economic control of
South America by the armed might of the United States.

Peacetime conscription begat Napoleon, Hitler, Mussolini and Stalin.

We are praying God will save America from Conscription!

"As to whether the conscription laws of modern European states can be
reconciled with men's inalienable rights the following may be said:
These laws, in as far as they impose compulsory military service upon
men of the state, are founded upon pagan precedent, and are abhorrent to
the spirit of Christianity. The modern conscription laws (which date
from the period of the French Revolution) and the political ideals that
have given rise to them, are an outcome of the revolt against the church
in the 16^th^ Century and the subsequent spread of non-Christian
philosophy in Europe. It is clear that these laws tend to override men's
personal rights in matters of the highest importance. Man's natural
right to free choice of work and to personal liberty of action are
suspended, and other rights are still more sacred are violated and
endangered. Besides, owing to the immense power which the conscription
laws put into the hands of a bureaucracy, one can easily understand how
almost every human right of the individual citizen is imperiled." –
Rev. L. Cahill, S.J., *Framework of a Christian State."* Page 318.
