% Day After Day - December 1941
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1941, 1, 4.

*Summary: Comments on union elections and favors John L. Lewis because
of his opposition to war. Colorful description of her surroundings and
the changing seasons. News of a wedding, illness, a birth, and visitors.
(DDLW \#377).*

Today the CIO convention is going on in Detroit. We sent telegrams to
Lewis, backing him in his fight in behalf of the miners, and for the
closed shop, and also for his opposition to war. We sent another to
Murray, calling his attention to the letter of Bishop Sheil in the
November issue of our paper on unionism. I like Murray much, although I
do not agree with him on his unqualified support of the President in
foreign relations. I like Murray's robust Scotch and Catholic attitude
usually. This statement is typical. He is speaking in relation to the
miners:

"I insist and contend that the United Mine Workers are right in
principle, they are right in good morals, they have a virtuous case,
they have stated the facts, and the National Defense Board has exercised
a reprehensible kind of discrimination in the recommendations which it
has submitted by a majority vote." In speaking of his position in regard
to the war he states that he is following his conscience.

Favor Is Fleeting
===

What a difference between this convention and last year's. I remember
that convention particularly because Tamar came down to Atlantic City by
herself on the bus from New York and joined me there. I had been
traveling through the Middle West for almost a month and she came down
to have Thanksgiving with me.

The convention was held in one of the boardwalk hotels and we had great
pleasure in walking along the sea and basking in the sunlight. It was
beautiful mild weather and the cries of the seagulls alone pierced the
silence out of doors.

Inside the convention hall there were furious demonstrations in favor of
Lewis. All the left wing unions were vociferous in their support. At the
same time their leaders were not much in favor at that time. Michael
Quill and Joe Curran were given half-hearted applause. When Joe Curran
was elected one of the vice-presidents of the CIO he was not
enthusiastically received. The position of the Catholic Workers was in a
way, with them in questioning the defense efforts, the prolonging of the
war by our aid. They for the reason that Russia was in the anomalous
position of having signed a treaty with Germany and we because of our
opposition to war.

This year there is hostility to Lewis. Right now he is not even present
at the convention and the newspapers are doing their best to build up
the impression in the minds of the public, of a break between the two
men. There may be a difference of opinion in regard to the foreign
policies of the President, but when it comes to labor, both men seem to
trust each other, and their interest in the welfare of the workers.
Undoubtedly the organized workers who are not having difficulties over
the union question, hours or wages, are with the administration. Those
who are in difficulties at the moment, in the way of strikes, though
they voted for the President during the last election, are opposing him
now in his threat to send the troops in to take over the mines. They are
thinking in terms of enlightened self-interest as it is called, in
short-range action. I believe that Lewis is thinking in terms of
long-range action, of what the future has in store.

Local Color
===
Today is a beautiful day, a soft haze in the air, gentle sunlight. All
morning I was in my room, typing and my two windows look out on brick
walls and the artificial lights in the rooms opposite. Walls, bricks,
fences, fire escapes, all are dingy. The ashcans in the back yard are
littered. The only bright spots are the clotheslines which hang in
scallops between the buildings, laden with multicolored clothing.

I wanted to catch Peter today at noonday mass at St. Andrews, so I left
the house at noon. The sunlight blinded me as I came out, hazy though it
was. There are still leaves on the trees, women with their baby
carriages were lined up in the park, and all the benches were crowded
with idle men. Some of them slept, their heads on the backs, their bent
arms, leaning against the backs of the benches. There is no grass in
this park to lie on. It is made up of trees and shrubs, and the earth is
packed hard and bare from the feet of many children. Mulberry bend and
Chinatown are the most congested districts in New York City.

In Between Weather
===

A good part of my writing today was done sitting in front of the two
stores at 115 Mott street. I dragged Margorie away from her letters to
take dictation, and we sat out there in the mild air and luxuriated in
the privacy of the open street. The office is always crowded, the
telephone is always ringing, people are always asking questions. Besides
it is stuffy, sitting inside on a day like this. The inside of dank,
dark tenements is most disagreeable in the in between seasons. In the
winter you settle down in your corners and try to keep warm. You keep
all doors and windows closed, to treasure the heat which comes from oil
stove or pot-bellied stove, or open grate. The doors are always opening
and shutting anyway, letting in terrific blasts of cold air. You are
refreshed when you get out from the stuffiness within, and you welcome
the warmth when you get inside. In the summer all doors and windows are
open and it is easier to keep clean and comfortable. But spring is
restless, one is comfortable neither inside nor out. And in the fall,
the inside is most gloomy with the promise of discomfort to come, its
halfhearted heat. Everybody longs to be out to capture and seize and
hold the last remaining hours of beauty of the dying year.

The Commonweal
===

Calling attention to our reprint on the first page of this issue of Ed
Skillen's review from the *Commonweal*, we'd like also to call attention
to the magazine as a whole for a Christmas gift to your friends. Some of
the articles we have liked most recently are those by Don Luigi Sturzo
on his Political Vocation, on The Ways of Providence; an article by Fr.
Orchard, Praying in War Time and many others, too numerous to mention.

Wedding
===

This month the only out of town trip was to Newport, Rhode Island, where
Bill Gauchat, Cleveland leader of the Catholic Worker activities which
include two houses of hospitality and a farm, was married to Dorothy
Schmidt, also of Cleveland, but who had been working in Newport as one
of Ade Bethune's apprentices for the past year. It was bright and
beautiful weather, and Peter Maurin and I went up by bus on Thanksgiving
Day. Sometimes we call the Newport crowd, a Catholic Worker craft group,
a cell, and sometimes it is Lion's College, of which Ade is president.
At any rate, it is now a sizable crowd, what with the de Bethune family
moving up this fall, and the Clendenning aunt and niece next door, and
Mary Krenzer, and Bridgit and Betty Finnigan there too. Present also at
the wedding was Graham Carey and Father Joseph Woods, Benedictine of
Portsmouth Priory, offered the Nuptial Mass.

Sickness
===

One of our fellow workers, Steve Hergenhan, went to Roosevelt Hospital
last month and is now doing nicely. He'd probably enjoy letters and
visits from his friends. A hint.

Visitors
===

During the month many visitors, including Dr. Feivus, exile from
Germany; Helene Iswoeski, from Paris; Elizabeth Rossi, from Switzerland.

Included in news of the month--a new baby born to John and Margaret
Magee, baptized John Joseph, October 26. John and Margaret formerly of
the Upton Farm, are living on their farm at Orange, Mass., not far from
Athol. John has been one of the leaders of the New England Catholic
Workers for the past six years.
