% Hunger Marchers in Washington
% Dorothy Day

*Commonweal*, 48 (December 24,1932):277-279. Reprinted with permission.

*Summary: Narrates the events surrounding a workers protest march in
Washington, D.C., organized by the Communists. Contrasts the press-fed
frenzy of the authorities with the well-planned, disciplined, and
non-violent demonstrators. (DDLW \#39).*

If the "capitalist press" and the police of Washington, D.C., had been
coached in their parts, they could not have staged a better drama from
the Communist standpoint than they did in the events of the last week in
Washington when the Hunger Marchers advanced on the Capitol.

Drama was what the Communist leaders of the march wanted, and drama,
even melodrama, was what they got. They weren't presenting their
petitions to Congress with any hope of obtaining cash bonuses and
unemployment relief. They were presenting pictorially the plight of the
workers of America, not only to the countless small towns and large
cities through which they passed, not only to the Senate and the House
of Representatives, but through the press to the entire world. And in
addition they were demonstrating, to the proletariat, the power of the
proletariat.

They were saying, "Come, submit yourselves to our discipline, -- place
yourselves in our hands, you union workers, you seamen, you unemployed,
and we will show you how a scant 3,000 of you, unarmed, can terrorize
authorities and make them submit to at least some of your demands!"

It does not matter that the victory won was only that of marching to the
Capitol. To those unarmed marchers who for two days and two cold nights
lived and slept on an asphalt street with no water, no fires, no
sanitary facilities, with the scantiest of food, surrounded by hysteria
in the shape of machine guns, gas guns, tear and nauseous gas bombs, in
the hands of a worn and fretted police force, egged on by a bunch of
ghouls in the shape of newspaper men and photographers, -- to these
marchers, the victory was a real one. They had achieved their purpose.

They had dramatized for the workers themselves their plight, and they
had given them a taste of power. They might be booed by police, sneered
at by the Vice President, they might be hungry, unshaven, shivering and
exhausted, but they felt a sense of power when they saw a whole capital,
the center of their country, mobilized against them.

When they had finally gained permission to march this morning, they set
out jauntily, defiantly, conscious of victory, though even as they were
escorted through the streets they were prisoners even as they had been
prisoners since Sunday on blockaded New York avenue, between the
Government-owned hillside and the miles of railway tracks on the other
side.

They were victors in that they had forced a stupid press to play into
their hands and give them columns and pages of dramatic publicity. They
were victors in that they had coerced the press to egg on the police to
a brutal and stupid show of force.

I do not blame the harried police, the firemen, the reserves, even
though they cursed and bullied and taunted the marchers as though they
were trying to provoke a bloody conflict. I blame the yellow press which
for a few ghastly headlines, a few gruesome pictures, was ready to
precipitate a useless massacre of a group of unemployed human beings,
who were being used as "Communist tactics," as "shock troops" in the
"class struggle."

It is true that the Hunger March was led by Communists. But it is also
true that ninety per cent of the marchers were union men and women who
were not Communists but were accepting for the time being the leadership
of the militant Unemployed Councils which are affiliated with the
Communist party. No other leaders present themselves, they argue.
Nothing is being done for us. We will accept this leadership and accept
the means offered by them to dramatize our plight.

I went through Union Square in New York Wednesday morning just as the
Hunger Marchers were getting ready to pull out for Washington. It was
sunny but very sharp and cold and the fresh-ploughed sod of the park had
a frozen, barren look. About twenty-five trucks were lined up at the
north end of the square and a few thousand "comrades" were gathered
around to see off their friends, the delegates chosen from the various
Unemployed Councils of New York. The march on Washington was organized
by the National Committee of these Unemployed Councils, and for the past
weeks delegates had been setting out from all over the United States,
from California, from Washington, Oregon, and all the middle western
States.

Details of the plan of the march were given a month ago in the Daily
Worker, the Communist newspaper. For the past months collections had
been taken up at all Communist meetings to finance the march, and the
trucks were hired for $100 apiece for nine days to take the delegates
to Washington and back again. According to the published plan of the
march, the delegates were to get to Washington, demonstrating on the way
in town and village, parade in Washington, present their petition, and
turn about and return to their homes, in the same organized fashion.
Discipline was to be maintained, violence was to be avoided, food and
lodging were to be requested from the cities on route and from
Washington, but all preparations such as the hiring of halls, rooms for
the delegates and food were to be made beforehand.

Carl Winter, the secretary of the Unemployed Council of New York is a
mild, serious man of thirty-five or so, said by his companions to be a
good organizer and a respected leader. He is a modest man, and refused
to speak for or be photographed by the news reel men, urging Anna
Burlak, Karl Reeve, and Ben Gold to go before the cameras. Anna Burlak
is a tall, blond, handsome girl of twenty-two, a leader of the textile
workers of New England, and as she says, not a Communist.

I talked with George Granich, one of the delegates on the march and the
pay-off man for the truckmen. "The New England bunch got in last night,"
he said, "and they were offered accommodations at the Municipal Lodging
House by the city. But to get these accommodations it was necessary to
go through all sorts of red tape, and the giving up of one's clothes to
be fumigated, so everyone went down to the Manhattan Lyceum and slept
wrapped in their blankets on the floor. These delegates are all picked
anyway, to withstand hardship on the march. They're a strong bunch and
ready to sleep on the trucks if they have to."

An attempt had been made to bar members of the "oppressed races" from
the march ("the hundred-per-cent American police would have had it in
for them," Granich said), and though several Chinese delegates were
refused permission to march, the Seamen's groups insisted on bringing
along Filipino delegates. The marine workers who occupied the first
trucks were a colorful group, made up as they were of all races. The
sailors with their tight-fitting dungarees, woven belts, wind-breakers
and pulled-down woolen caps looked like the posters the Russian
government puts out of international types.

The line of march as planned lay through Jersey City, Elizabeth, Newark,
New Brunswick, Trenton, Philadelphia, Wilmington, Chester, Baltimore and
on to Washington.

I did not follow the progress of the Western group going into
Washington, but the progress of the northern group was typical. There
was no trouble for the marchers in any of the cities on the way until
they reached Wilmington. There they were holding a meeting in a church
and Ben Gold, one of the leaders, was making a speech, when suddenly
windows were broken simultaneously on either side of the hall and tear
gas bombs were thrown in. The meeting was in an uproar and milled out
into the streets in anything but orderly fashion, as was natural. There
the police took the opportunity to club and beat the marchers. Ben Gold,
after being badly beaten, was jailed, and the march went on without him.

On Sunday, with the Hunger Marchers approaching Washington, the city,
according to the papers, was in a state bordering on hysteria. There
were riot drills of the marines at Quantico; guards at the White House,
Capitol, Treasury, plants of the electric and gas companies, arsenals of
the National Guard and the Sixth Marine Reserve. The police force, the
National Guard, the American Legion, countless volunteers, supplemented
by 370 firemen, all were armed with machine guns, tear gas, nauseating
gas, revolvers, sawed-off shot guns, night sticks, lengths of rubber
hose. The newspapers with scareheads and photographs of the radical
"army" fanned the flame of hostility, and of actual fear. When I went
out with some newspaper men to meet the marchers and to visit their
final encampment, I was struck by the fact that perhaps the most
frightened of all were the newspaper men. They implored their editors to
authorize the purchase of gas masks (thirty dollars apiece) and they
kept a good distance away from the marchers, and with their eyes peeled
for the best means of escape should anything happen.

In addition to the marchers, groups of liberals came to the city to give
their moral support to and to add their petitions to those of the 3,000
marchers. There were delegates from the League of Professional Groups
which was formed before the National election to support the Communist
candidates and which is now continuing its propaganda in support of the
Communist movement. Members of this delegation included Malcolm Cowley,
one of the editors of the *New Republic*, Matthew Josephson, magazine
writer and author of several biographies, James Rorty, poet, John
Hermann, novelist and winner of the Scribner prize this year, Michael
Gold, writer, Charles Rumford Walker, former associate editor of *The
Atlantic Monthly*, and others.

When the news came out that the marchers were being held prisoners in
the half-mile stretch of roadway, fifty-feet wide, this group of
liberals joined forces with the National Committee for the Defense of
Political prisoners to take legal action to free them. A writ of habeas
corpus was taken out and an injunction asked against the city
commissioners.

Various women's organizations, pacifist groups, the Fellowship of
Reconciliation, the Quaker Church, and others protested against the
ludicrous and uncalled-for show of force.

Only one paper in Washington, the Scripps Howard paper, the *Daily
News*, gave a calm, unhysterical account of the situation. It suggested
editorially that the marchers were within their rights in wishing to
present their petition and that such imprisonment of the marchers and
show of force was both unnecessary and unconstitutional.

The other papers screamed of the "mad fanaticism" of the marchers,
"fanned to wild fury by the inflammatory speeches of the leaders." The
*Star* spoke of razor blades secreted in the shoes of the marchers which
could, if kicked with properly, sever arteries of the police. They
hinted "they may be armed." And they went on in this way through edition
after edition, Sunday and all day Monday.

Then Tuesday morning, this morning, it was announced that the marchers
were to parade and to leave tonight. And so, after this permission to
parade had been refused them steadily before and since their entry into
Washington, they did parade, just as they had set out to do, just as the
campaign had been mapped out for them in the *Daily Worker* a month
before. The plan was delayed, but not defeated.

The papers did their best to make a riot out of it and failed. They
merely presented the Communist leaders in the eyes of the discontented
unemployed of America as powerful leaders who could carry through
successfully a planned and disciplined demonstration. And the
Washingtonians who lined the streets by the thousands to watch the
procession, laughed tolerantly at the songs and slogans, and said
admiringly, "They sure have got gumption, standing up against the police
that way."
