% Why Do the Members of Christ Tear One Another?
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1942, 1, 4, 7.

*Summary: Protesting against a journalist's assertion that they are
sentimentalists in their pacifism and afraid of suffering, she
challenges her critics to spend time in the city slums where Catholic
Workers regularly battle the realities of disease, poverty, filth, cold,
foul smells, etc. Quoting Dostoevsky, she assures her readers that
Catholic Workers were not sanctimonious but approached their work with
true humility and love. Notes with irony that pacifism, while not
popular with society as a whole, was the philosophy which society wished
to impose on the poor and disenfranchised victims of America's class
war. Rejects the suggestion that they should remain silent. (DDLW
\#390).*


Why Do the Members of Christ Tear One Another? Why Do We Rise Up Against
Our Own Body in Such Madness? Have We Forgotten That We Are All Members
One of Another?--St. Clement.

Fr. Stratman writes: "We think with Cardinal Faulhaber that Catholic
moral theology must in fact begin to speak a new language, and that what
the last two Popes have already pronounced in the way of **general**
sentences of condemnation on modern war should be translated into the
systematic terminology of the schools. The simple preacher and pastor
can, however, already begin by making his own words of the reigning Holy
Father (Pius XI), 'murder,' 'suicide,' 'monstrous crime.'"

"But we are at war," people say. "This is no time to talk of peace. It
is demoralizing to the armed forces to protest, not to cheer them on in
their fight for Christianity, for democracy, for civilization. Now that
it is under way, it is too late to do anything about it." One reader
writes to protest against our "frail" voices "blatantly" crying out
against war. (The word blatant comes from bleat, and we are indeed poor
sheep crying out to the Good Shepherd to save us from these horrors.)
Another Catholic newspaper says it sympathizes with our sentimentality.
This is a charge always leveled against pacifists. We are supposed to be
afraid of the suffering, of the hardships of war.

But let those who talk of softness, of sentimentality, come to live with
us in cold, unheated houses in the slums. Let them come to live with the
criminal, the unbalanced, the drunken, the degraded, the pervert. (It is
not decent poor, it is not the decent sinner who was the recipient of
Christ's love.) Let them live with rats, with vermin, bedbugs, roaches,
lice (I could describe the several kinds of body lice).

Let their flesh be mortified by cold, by dirt, by vermin; let their eyes
be mortified by the sight of bodily excretions, diseased limbs, eyes,
noses, mouths.

Let their noses be mortified by the smells of sewage, decay and rotten
flesh. Yes, and the smell of the sweat, blood and tears spoken of so
blithely by Mr. Churchill, and so widely and bravely quoted by
comfortable people.

Let their ears be mortified by harsh and screaming voices, by the
constant coming and going of people living herded together with no
privacy. (There is no privacy in tenements just as there is none in
concentration camps.)

Let their taste be mortified by the constant eating of insufficient food
cooked in huge quantities for hundreds of people, the coarser foods, the
cheaper foods, so that there will be enough to go around; and the smell
of such cooking is often foul.

Then when they have lived with these comrades, with these sights and
sounds, let our critics talk of sentimentality.

"Love in practice is a harsh and dreadful thing compared to love in
dreams."

Our Catholic Worker groups are perhaps too hardened to the sufferings in
the class war, living as they do in refugee camps, the refugees being as
they are victims of the class war we live in always. We live in the
midst of this war now these many years. It is a war not recognized by
the majority of our comfortable people. They are pacifists themselves
when it comes to the class war. They even pretend it is not there.

Many friends have counseled us to treat this world war in the same way.
"Don't write about it. Don't mention it. Don't jeopardize the great work
you are doing among the poor, among the workers. Just write about
constructive things like Houses of Hospitality and Farming Communes.
"Keep silence with a bleeding heart," one reader, a man, pro-war and
therefore not a sentimentalist, writes us.

But we cannot keep silent. We have not kept silence in the face of the
monstrous injustice of the class war, or the race war that goes on side
by side with this world war (which the Communist used to call the
imperialist war.)

Read the letters in this issue of the paper, the letter from the machine
shop worker as to the deadening, degrading hours of labor. Read the
quotation from the missioner's letter from China. Remember the unarmed
steel strikers, the coal miners, shot down on picket lines. Read the
letter from our correspondent in Seattle who told of the treatment
accorded agricultural workers in the North West. Are these workers
supposed to revolt? These are Pearl Harbor incidents! Are they supposed
to turn to arms in the class conflict to defend their lives, their
homes, their wives and children?

Another Pearl Harbor
---

Last month a Negro in Missouri was shot and dragged by a mob through the
streets behind a car. His wounded body was then soaked in kerosene. The
mob of white Americans then set fire to it, and when the poor anguished
victim had died, the body was left lying in the street until a city
garbage cart trucked it away. Are the Negroes supposed to "Remember
Pearl Harbor" and take to arms to avenge this cruel wrong? No, the
Negroes, the workers in general, are expected to be "pacifist" in the
face of this aggression.

Love Is the Measure
---

Perhaps we are called sentimental because we speak of love. We say we
love our president, our country. We say that we love our enemies, too.
"Hell," Bernanos said,"is not to love any more."

"Greater love hath no man than this," Christ said, "that he should lay
down his life for his friend."

"Love is the measure by which we shall be judged," St. John of the Cross
said.

"Love is the fulfilling of the law," St. John, the beloved disciple
said.

Read the last discourse of Jesus to his disciples. Read the letters of
St. John in the New Testament. And how can we express this love--by
bombers, by blockades?

Here is a clipping from the Herald Tribune, a statement of a soldier
describing the use of the bayonet against the Japanese:

"He (his father) should have been with us and seen how good it was. We
got into them good and proper, and I can't say I remember much about it,
except that it made me feel pretty good. I reckon that was the way with
the rest of the company, by the way my pals were yelling all the time."

Is this a Christian speaking?

"Love is an exchange of gifts," St. Ignatius said.

Love is a breaking of bread.

Remember the story of Christ meeting His disciples at Emmaus? All along
the road He had discoursed to them, had expounded the scriptures. And
then they went into into the inn at Emmaus, and sat down to the table
together. And He took bread and blessed it and broke it and handed it to
them, and they knew Him in the breaking of bread! (St. Luke, 24, 13-35.)

Love is not the starving of whole populations. Love is not the
bombardment of open cities. Love is not killing, it is the laying down
of one's life for one's friend.

Worse Than Others
---

Hear Fr. Zossima, in the brothers Karamazev:

"Love one another, Fathers," he said, speaking to his monks. "Love God's
people. Because we have come here and shut ourselves within these walls,
we are no holier than those that are outside, but on the contrary, from
the very fact of coming here, each of us has confessed to himself that
he is worse than others, than all men on earth. . .And the longer the
monk lives in his seclusion, the more keenly he must recognize that.
Else he would have no reason to come here.

Responsible for All Sins
---

"When he realizes that he is not only worse than others, but that he is
responsible to all men for all and everything, for all human sins,
national and individual, only then the aim of our seclusion is attained.
For know, dear ones, that every one of us is undoubtedly responsible for
all men and everything on earth, not merely through the general
sinfulness of creation, but each one personally for all mankind and
every individual man. For monks are not a special sort of man, but only
what all men ought to be. Only through that knowledge, our heart grows
soft with infinite, universal, inexhaustible love. Then every one of you
will have the power to win over the whole world by love and to wash away
the sins of the world with your tears. . .Each of you keep watch over
your heart and confess your sins to yourself unceasingly. . .Hate not
the atheists, the teachers of evil, the materialists, and I mean not
only the good ones--for there are many good ones among them, especially
in our day--hate not even the wickedness. Remember them in your prayers
thus: Save, O Lord, all those who have none to pray for them, save too
all those who will not pray. And add, it is not in pride that I make
this prayer, O Lord, for I am lower than all men. . ."

"Holier Than Thou"
---

I quote this because that accusation "holier than thou" is also made
against us. And we must all admit our guilt, our participation in the
social order which has resulted in this monstrous crime of war.

We used to have a poor demented friend who came into the office to see
us very often, beating his breast, quoting the penitential psalms in
Hebrew, and saying that everything was his fault. Through all he had
done and left undone, he had brought about the war, the revolution.

That should be our cry, with every mouthful we eat, "We are starving
Europe!" When we look to our comfort in a warm bed, a warm home, we must
cry, "My brother, my mother, my child is dying of cold.

"I am lower than all men, because I do not love enough. O God take away
my heart of stone and give me a heart of flesh."
