% Day After Day - September 1943
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1943, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: Explains why she is leaving The Catholic Worker for a year of
"solitude and silence" to practice the "weapons of the Spirit." Notes
all those who will carry on the work and says she will continue to write
and says her Christian pacifist stance hasn't changed. (DDLW \#395).*

This explanation is almost as hard to write as the story of my
conversion. There are as many explanations that could be given, natural
and supernatural, for the step which I am about to take, there are as
many obvious explanations as to how I came to this decision.

A couple of months ago I was listening to a conference by Father Vernon
Moore at the Cenacle in which he was explaining to some of us Oblates
the Rule of St. Benedict. The Fifth Degree of Humility, he said, was to
be open with one's superiors about all things, and this applied, too, to
the attitude one ought to take with one's family, with one's associates,
whether in office or school. And a discussion proceeded as to whether
one could speak openly to one's family, or business associates about
things that were so close to the soul. There was a good bit of
Anglo-Saxon reticence evident, a reluctance that most expressed to talk
of these matters so sacred.

Gratitude
===

But a convert feels somewhat differently. One is always having to pay
one's debt of gratitude – to give a reason for the Faith that is in her.
So I am regarding it as a duty to try to explain to our friends and
readers just why I am leaving THE CATHOLIC WORKER.

It will be noticed that on the masthead this month there is the name of
Arthur Sheehan. He is the new editor and publisher of THE CATHOLIC
WORKER, and he will follow faithfully Peter Maurin's program of the
Personalist and Communitarian Movement. Peter Maurin, of course, will be
right here, the official agitator. Working with them will be Father
Clarence Duffy, with whose writings our readers are familiar, and who
has a leave of absence from his Diocese in Ireland to write and work
along these lines. David Mason, formerly one of the leaders of our
Philadelphia House of Hospitality, will be in charge of St. Joseph's
House of Hospitality here at 115 Mott street, as well as of the make-up
of the paper. And we will still be having the faithful cooperation of
Charles O'Rourke, who has been coming in ever since Fifteenth street
days, not only to help us as he is doing, right now in our circulation
department, but to help out in times of emergency, such as the Seamen's
strike when he, John Cort and Joseph Hughes helped feed the seamen at
the Waterfront Branch of THE CATHOLIC WORKER for three months in 1937.
There is also Michael Domanski who, like Dave Mason, helps in kitchen or
office irrespectively.

Good Helpers
===

We have never had a good kitchen force with Chu, Joe Cotter and Shorty
Smith, and Bill Wilson to help out: with Slim Born and Bill Duffy
helping with the breadlines in the morning and Joe Motyka helping in the
circulation office, Dwight Larrowe, assistant director of the
Association of Catholic Conscientious Objectors, and one of the leads of
THE CATHOLIC WORKER also these last three years, is the only remaining
member of our community here subject to the draft. He probably will be
taken from us within the next month or so.

And yet with all the comings and goings, things have never run so
smoothly. Strangely enough, when so many of the other houses have
collapsed due to the war and removal of vital workers, always extra
helpers have come in to keep us going on Mott street. Where we have had
32 houses we now have 16. There are still almost a dozen farms
associated in some way together in trying to work out Peter Maurin's
Personalist and Communitarian Revolution.

Leaders Needed
===

What is most needed, one might say, in view of the times ahead, when the
Post-War World will face unemployment and a most stupendous job of
reconstruction, what is most needed will be more leaders to build up new
Houses of Hospitality and new Farming Communes all over the country.

Our Lord told us how to find helpers. He said "Pray ye, therefore, that
laborers be found for the harvest." We talk constantly of the weapons of
the spirit and our whole lives are filled with such tremendous activity
that we are in danger of not using these same weapons. Always the heresy
of Good Works is to be guarded against. Always we must remember that St.
Bernard spoke of "these accursed occupations." Always we must remember
how St. Thomas said "action should be something added to the life of
Prayer, not something taken from it."

Retreat Houses
===

And where are we going to learn to pray? Where are we going to learn to
use these spiritual weapons? The only answer that we can see is in
retreat houses, where we can spend eight days every year and monthly
days besides, in silence and in receiving instruction. It is certainly a
dream for the future – a retreat house by the sea. The immensity of the
sea will lead us so naturally to worship and adore the greatness of God.
A retreat house with a farming commune attached where food can be raised
for all the retreatants, who will be workers and poor people from our
breadlines, mothers from the slums. There would almost have to be a
nursery attached where these mothers could receive such instruction as
that which is given by the Ladies of the Grail at their courses in
Wheeling, Illinois.

And where are the priests and where are the teachers to give these
retreats for the integrated Christian life? God certainly will send them
to us.

Second Novitiate
===

Every ten years I understand the Marist Fathers go away for a "second
novitiate." There is also the Jesuit Tertianship.

For the last few years I've been thinking a great deal of putting aside
the responsibility of THE CATHOLIC WORKER and its manifold activities at
115 Mott Street, but every time the idea came to me I put it aside as a
temptation. It was during my retreat this summer that the conviction
came to me that I should take this step . it was after one of the
conferences when I was kneeling before a stature of the Blessed Mother
that suddenly I began to think of how beautifully hidden and quite a
life was hers.

In this day of WACS and WAVES, of women in war plants and babies in
nurseries, in this most peculiar time when women have abandoned the home
and the family; at this time when women are so prominent in public life,
and there is talk even of registering them for conscription, just as men
are conscripted, for WACS and WAVES, as well as for industry, it is a
wonderful thing to sit and think how completely hidden a life was that
of the Blessed Mother. St. Bonaventure writes so beautifully of that
hidden life at Nazareth. Father Vincent McNabb writes of Nazareth or
Social Chaos in one of his best-loved books. And while I thought of
these things I thought with an overwhelming conviction: Certainly the
Blessed Mother would approve of this decision of mine, and I suddenly
knew that I had indeed made a decision.

Do you remember how St. Francis, in looking for a Rule, opened at random
three separate times the New Testament and found therein three simple
texts by which he decided he and his followers would live? Many times in
my very busy life a text will run in my head for an entire day or even
for several days at a time. And for some days before the retreat the
text that had been flashing into my brain now and again with great
vividness was this startling one: "Why do you love vanity and seek after
lying?" Certainly not a very happy text to be flashed upon the screen of
your mind. And then after this decision had come to me I realized that
when a move such as this one became necessary – to cling to a job or
work against the inspiration of the Holy Spirit would indeed be vanity
and lying.

A second text which came to mind after I had made my decision was, "Be
still and know that I am God." And I thought to myself: That is what I
should do: go away for a year and live in solitude and quiet; neither
see nor write to friends, nor do anything else but practice the use of
these Weapons of the Spirit about which we have been talking and writing
so much these past years.

Not that we have not been using them, of course. Certainly in our
movement the insistence upon daily Mass and Communion, prayer in common,
the practice of the Spiritual as well as the Corporal Works of Mercy and
the practice of Voluntary Poverty in order to be able to perform the
Corporal Works of Mercy, all these means have been used. But I, as the
leader in a movement, had the greater obligation – the obligation to be
always seeking the lesser place, to be a servant to others, to be giving
up constantly responsibilities so that others could undertake more, and
could use the capacities and abilities and talents that God had given
them.

To Put on Christ
===

The third text that came to me with great consolation was, "Fear not,
little flock, for I have reserved to you a Kingdom," and I thought with
much happiness and joy that God indeed loves this little flock made up
of Catholic Workers, not only here in the United States, but all over
the world, and that he is going to prepare us more and more for the work
He wants us to do. "The Kingdom of God is at hand. The Kingdom of God is
within you." We are not thinking of "pie in the sky," but of the Heaven
that should begin for each one of us here and now at this moment,
because we see Christ in our fellows. Because we are striving to put on
Christ.

It is not, of course, that we of our own efforts can do anything. As St.
Teresa said: "Teresa and three ducats can do nothing, but God and Teresa
and three ducats can do everything." The Holy Father in his most recent
encyclical on the Mystical Body tells us that we should not
underestimate the part that we ourselves have to play in working for
salvation. "We can do all things in Christ Who strengthens us."

The Peter Book
===

I must go on writing, of course, so there will bean occasional *Day by
Day* column in THE CATHOLIC WORKER. I will write articles, of course,
too, because I will have to support myself. I will go on with the
*Peter* book, which has been so long promised and so far so sketchily
done.

I am not making this move without the advice of a Spiritual Director,
and, of course, too, I have acquainted Bishop McIntyre of the New York
Chancery Office (to whom I have always gone with our problems) with this
latest move.

One thing, of course, I wish to stress, and that is that there is no
change in my convictions in regard to War and Peace and the means to
attain it. I have been and still am a Christian Pacifist, opposing class
war, race war, civil war, and international war. As I have declared in
January, if conscription comes for women, I will not register, and if
this breaking of the law means still further retirement, of course, I
shall consider myself privileged to go to jail, where one can be quite
sure of not doing one's own will. Plenty of opportunity for the
exercising of selfless love there. I will take it as another way of
"making my year." (I certainly hope it would not be longer.)

Not Dissociated
===

I shall, of course (and Bishop McIntyre urged this), not be dissociated
from the Movement. But I am not longer owner and publisher, no longer
editor of THE CATHOLIC WORKER, no longer connected with *St. Joseph's
House on Mott Street*, and no longer trustee of the *Easton Farming
Commune*, no longer on any committees, no longer lecturing, no longer
traveling, no longer writing letters.

These last three years when we have been making our six-day retreat in
silence, it has been wonderful how intimate and close all those who have
made the retreat have grown. When you live with others in such silence
you get to see people as God sees them.

This year of solitude and silence is going to bring me, I am sure, even
closer to all our Catholic Workers and readers and fellow workers. And
as for what will follow in October, 1944, that is in the Hands of God.
