% Background For Peter Maurin
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1944, 3, 6.

*Summary: A detailed description of Mott Street's environs and the
people who lived there as a backdrop to writing about Peter Maurin--"a
genius, a saint, an agitator, a lecturer, a poor man and a shabby tramp;
all in one." Reviews his early life, much of the story told in Peter's
own words. (DDLW \#405).*

Mott street, New York, is a mile long, extending from Houston street
down to Chatham Square. It is a curved street, very slightly and gently
curved. It turns into Chatham Square where the Bowery ends and becomes
Park Row, where East Broadway, New Bowery, Bowery, Park Row, and Mott
street all run together. All of Chatham Square is dark and dank under
the elevated lines, for here the Third Avenue line branches out and goes
down Park Row to Brooklyn Bridge, and down New Bowery to South Ferry, a
mile or so away.

Here Chinatown and the Bowery meet, and the Bowery used to be like a
bower, and lovers used to walk there. Now it is a street of the poor, a
street of cheap hotels, where men can lodge for twenty or thirty cents a
night. In all the larger cities of the country they have such streets,
and the migrants call them Skid Roads, and the term originated in the
northwest among the lumber workers who came to town from the woods with
their pay envelopes and either put the skids under themselves or had
them put under them by the liquor they drank or the company they kept.

The Bowery is the street of the poor, and there are pawnshops and
second-hand clothes shops. Here sailors and coal heavers and dock
workers without families come to live because they have not enough money
to live elsewhere. Here are their cheap amusements, movie houses, penny
arcades and taverns. Here also the unemployed congregate, and there is a
thieve's market, where everything can be sold, from a razor to a pair of
pants. The very clothes on one's back can be sold and substituted for
overalls or dungarees. Here, too, men lie prone on sidewalks, sleeping
in doorways and against the housefronts. Here, too, are fights; and
because of this the street now has the name of a street of bums and
panhandlers, drunks and petty thieves. But it is the street of the poor,
the most abandoned poor. It is the street of missions, where for a
confession of faith, men are given a bed, and thus religion is dragged,
too, in the mire, and becomes an attempted opiate of the people.

Here is Christ in His most degraded guise, spat upon, buffeted, mocked,
derided. Here are temples of the Holy Ghost, men made to the image and
likeness of God. Here are men. "Thou knowest we are but dust." Thou
knowest, too, that Thou hast made us "little less than the angels."

This is not a glamorous neighborhood. There is no romance or beauty
here. Waterfront neighborhoods have the beauty of the water, the mystery
of the river, lake or sea. Then, too, the national neighborhoods,
whether they be Irish, Syrian, Russian, Italian, Basque, Jewish--all
these neighborhoods have their own atmospheres. There are homes there,
even if they are tenement house apartments; there are cafes, grocery
stores, there are distinctive sights, sounds and smells, not without
charm.

One block west of the Bowery is Elizabeth street, and next comes Mott,
then Mulberry, then Baxter. These four streets in their less than a mile
extent comprise little Italy. Mott street is the most colorful of all.
Beginning at the north end there is the old Cathedral, with a high
walled graveyard around it and catacombs beneath it. Legend has it that
the builder of the tenement we live in, stood on the steps of old St.
Patrick's and with a gun in his hands, held off the Know Nothings,
rioting and attempting to wreck and burn the church.

Here thanks to the church yard, the sun pours down on the section and
there are parades of baby carriages and stout mothers backed against
sunny walls, winter and summer.

Further south the street takes on the aspect of a canyon, and the
buildings are six stories high and the street narrow so that little sun
lights here save in the middle of the day. But below Grand street the
push carts begin and these take from the drabness of the street, and the
bright fruits and vegetables light up the scene. Here are grapes,
mushrooms, yellow squash, tomatoes, bananas, beans and greens of all
kinds, fishstands with whelks and live eels and snails. Here are cheese
stores and cheeses pressed into the shape of reindeer and pigs or just
displayed in twig baskets. They hang in skins, in raffia woven nets;
they are white, yellow and smoked, and the smoking takes place out in
front by the curbstone, underneath barrels. There are spaghetti stores
with all variety of spaghetti, all shapes, all lengths, and the wheat
which makes it comes from all parts of the world and families have their
preference. There are bakeries, and from down in the basements where
there are ovens built in, the warm delicious smell of fresh loaves
steals out into the street to mingle with the smell of pizzas, flat
doughy cakes with cheese and tomato paste spread on top and sold hot to
eat in the street.

In their season there are vendors of hot roast sweet potatoes, roast
corn, roast chick peas, and during fiestas, hot meat cakes and sausages.
In the good weather one could live out of doors without ever carrying on
any housekeeping inside. And families do, the fathers sitting around
tables playing cards, the mothers by the children's or grandchildren's
carriages, knitting, crocheting, talking, shouting, laughing, crying,
living out their lives under the open sky.

No matter how early you are up, Katie will be arranging her push cart at
the corner; a new shift will have come on duty at the restaurant on the
corner where they sell beer and shrimp, whelk and smelts, and there is
always a great cleaning of fish and a hosing out of basement and
sidewalk.

And no matter how late you stay up, there are always groups on the
street corners in front of taverns, and coming and going from work. This
is a neighborhood of workers, just as the Bowery is a street of the
unemployed.

Below Grand to Hester street the push carts line the street. Then from
Hester to Canal there are tenements and factory lofts, and directly
across the street from The Catholic Worker office (where Peter Maurin
lives) there is a big paved playground with trees and ponds and animals
painted on the walls of the Children's Aid Society, a settlement which
flanks it on Hester. Always there is the sound of children in your ears,
winter and summer, and during the summer here is dancing either in the
playground or under the roof of the settlement three nights a week.
During festas they set up a bandstand across the street and the
twenty-piece band adds its slow and majestic clamor to all the other
noises.

New York during its working hours when people flood in from Jersey, Long
Island, Westchester, Staten Island, from north, south, east and west, is
the largest city in the world.

"Where seven million people live together in peace and harmony," one of
the radio announcers used to say happily.

There is Harlem, of course, where close on to a million of our
population live in degradation and misery and unemployment. There is the
threat of class war and race war in Harlem.

There are occasional battles between police and pickets in class war.

There are anti-Semitic meetings, and anti-anti-Semitic meetings in
Brooklyn and the Bronx and occasional fights at both.

But just the same we all live in comparative peace and concord in New
York City. If you count the commuters, you can say this is a city of
nine million inhabitants.

Canada has only eleven million people. There are truly too many people
gathered together in this little space.

Down here on Mott street, half a block north of Chinatown, in the
Italian section, in the most congested city in the world, Peter Maurin,
God's fellow-worker, prime mover in the decentralist movement in this
country, makes his headquarters.

This book is about him, and it will be filled with digressions, just as
Peter's conversations seem to be filled with digressions, so that it is
hard to pin him down. But it will be seen when I have finished that with
all these digressions, all these perambulations, there is a picture
presented, a point made, history being written, even history being made.

I am writing of a genius, a saint, an agitator, a writer, a lecturer, a
poor man and a shabby tramp; all in one. And to make the picture more
complete, I am trying to give it background, color, people--because
Peter does not live in a vacuum, but in a community, in a parish, in a
street, in a neighborhood, in a city, in a society, in a state, in the
world.

St. Paul like to use that term, "God's fellow worker"; and Peter is
God's fellow worker because when he prays, he is saying, "Thy will be
done on earth as it is in heaven," and then he goes around trying to see
to it that God's will be done.

How can he tell what is God's will, many people may say. "What is God's
will?" And Peter, who never answers questions directly, will begin
quoting some of his easy essays, as we have come to title them in The
Catholic Worker.

I do not remember what were the first essays he showed me. He carried
sheaves of them around in his pockets, entangled with pamphlets, books,
digests of what he had been reading.

But it was not with the social encyclicals of the Popes that Peter began
my indoctrination. It was with the prophets of Israel and the fathers of
the church. It was also with Pius XI's encyclical on St. Francis of
Assisi. "Here is the way," he seemed to shout, "but," sadly, "since men
are what they are, and want a plan, all right, here are plans." and then
out came the social encyclicals of Leo XIII, Pius XI, and now latterly,
Pius XII.

This book is going to be full of quotations, some of them straight prose
and some of them in Peter's neatly phrased digests. But when I mention
encyclicals and such pamphlets, it is not necessary to quote from them.
They can be obtained from many a church pamphlet rack throughout the
length and breadth of the land. One of the best racks in New York is
that at the Paulist Church, on Columbus avenue and Fifty-ninth street.

Ever since my book, *House of Hospitality*, was printed three years ago,
I have been trying to write this book, *About Peter Maurin*.

Now the work is about done, or as much done as it ever will be, because
it could go on and on, and after it is published I will be thinking for
the rest of my life of the things that didn't go into the book, how it
should have been written, and so on. That is one of the things that has
held up the work. Peter has so much to say, and there are so many people
waiting to hear what he has to say, that I falter, thinking of my own
inadequacy. Perhaps my doing it will prevent others who are more capable
than I from writing about him.

And yet my job is that of an editor and so the only thing to do is to go
about it with humility and prayer, get the work down on paper and give
it out.

There is already one book about The Catholic Worker movement entitled
*The Green Revolution*, published by the Dominican Press in Belgium,
with a foreword by Abbe Cardign, who is now in a German concentration
camp. That book has not yet been translated.

Peter is sixty-six years old, this year of 1944. He was born in a small
French community, 200 miles from Barcelona, one of a family of
twenty-four children. His own mother died after having given birth to
five children, and his father married again, and there were nineteen
more children. Amongst them now there are four teachers, three
carpenters, some farm hands, and Peter lost track of the rest. Some of
his sisters are nuns, and some of his brothers are religious.

"My mother's name," said Peter, "was Marie Pages. She died in 1885. Of
her five children, only I and Celestin, a brother who was eighteen
months younger than I, and my sister Marie, two years younger than my
brother, were left. My whole name was Aristide Pierre. Pierre was my
grandfather and my godfather. He died at the age of ninety-four and he
was never sick. He worked in the fields until he was eighty-five and
after that he could not because of his eyes. So he stayed home and made
baskets and recited his rosary. He liked to work. He knew it was good
for him.

"The last I heard of my brother he was the head of a school in Paris,
St. Clothilde's, a parish school. He had been a Christian Brother, but
when they were secularized they no longer wore the garb but went on
teaching just the same. One of my half brothers taught for the Christian
Brothers' School and he was married to a school teacher, who taught in
the public school. In the last war he had a bullet in his body
seventy-one days when he was taken prisoner by the Germans. I, myself,
taught school with the Christian Brothers for about five years.

"Celestin was teaching in Pueblo, Mexico, when the last war broke out
and he returned to France, and because he had not served his time in the
army, he was put in the medical corps. He was buried alive by one shell
bursting near him, and unburied by another. Another half brother was
lost in the war and there were five others in that war and maybe some in
this.

"My youngest half sister was a weakling but got stronger as she got
older. She studied in England and she is a nun, I don't know what order,
and is head of a school in Bolivia."

One time when Peter was giving us slogans, as we sat around the table at
the Easton farm, and he proposed the slogan, "Eat what you raise and
raise what you eat," we asked him what they ate in his family when he
was a boy.

"We did not eat the calves, we sold them," he said. "We ate salt pork
every day. We raised no hops, so there was no beer. We raised no grapes,
so no wine. We had very little meat. We had plenty of bread--there was a
communal oven. We had plenty of butter to season things with; we had
eggs. We had codfish from the Brittany fishermen. They went all the way
to Newfoundland and Iceland to fish. We had vegetable soups, salads and
cheese.

"It was in 1882 when the public school system started; when I was five
years old. It was obligatory in every village. My mother and father
could not speak French, only a dialect like Catalan. (Joffre was born in
French Catalonia, and Foch in Basque. Catalonian is spoken in
Barcelona.) Our home language was more Latin than French. The name of
our town was a Latin one, Oultet.

"The seat of our diocese was twelve miles away, and our parish church
two miles away. Oultet had fifteen families and in the parish there were
ten villages. There were two priests, and they worked very hard. To help
make their living they worked in the garden. The villagers provided them
with wood, and they got some little pay from the state, a compensation
which was regulated by the concordat made by Napoleon.

"There are eight-nine departments in France, and in my province,
Languedoc, there were seven or nine departments.

"My family owned eighty sheep and there was a herder for all the
village. He had an assistant in summer. There were probably three
thousand sheep in the flock and they grazed on what was still communal
land. It was very cold in winter. The fuel we used was branches from the
trees. We used to cut the branches every three years. The leaves were
for the sheep and the branches for firewood. We cooked at an open
fireplace.

"My father is dead, and my stepmother must be seventy-five now. Her name
was Rosalie. She was nineteen when she married my father. Last I heard,
my brother was still farming, and dealing in cattle.

"I lived there in the southern part of France, a peasant, on the soil,
until I was fourteen, and then I went away to school. When I went to the
Christian Brothers' school near Paris, and five years later when I was
teaching there, I was a member of a study club in Paris. It was the same
time Charles Peguy was there, but I did not know him, nor was I
influenced by him. Instead I was interested in a group which published a
paper which came out twice a week, called *Le Sillon*. It had nothing to
do with the decentralist movement, no, but it was interested in ethics.
It understood the chaos of the times. Marc Sangnier was editor and
backer of the paper. Later my friends got out a weekly paper called *The
Spirit of Democracy*. They were looking for an ideology. They were
preoccupied about the idea of an elite in a democracy.

"I did not like the idea of revolution. I did not like the French
revolution, nor the English revolution. I did not wish to work to
perpetuate the proletariat so I never became a member of a union even
though here in America I did all kinds of hard labor. I was always
interested in the land and man's life on the land.

"That is why I went homesteading to Canada but after two years, when my
partner was killed, I went around the country with work gangs and
entered this country in 1911, where I have been ever since."

(To be continued)
