% The Servile State
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July August 1945, 1, 3.

*Summary: Inveighs against social security legislation in Britain and
America noting that Hillaire Belloc prophesized it in his 1912 book *The
Servile State*. Proposes a Catholic solution based on distributism,
ownership, and "the little way." Recalls Belloc's visit to the Catholic
Worker. (DDLW \#412).*

On the eve of Hilaire Belloc's seventy-fifth birthday, the Servile State
was ushered into Great Britain with Prime Minister Attlee taking the
place of Churchill. Contrary to the opinion of most conservatives, the
new government is not a step toward collectivism, but a solidifying of
capitalism, with the sop thrown to the proletariat of social *security*,
health laws, education laws, etc. The State has taken possession of the
masses, with their approval. Most people look upon the new regime as the
lesser of two evils, and a step forward in progress.

Hilaire Belloc wrote the book, "The Servile State," back in 1912, and
since then there have been three editions, the last in 1927. This Great
Catholic book has never been printed in America. It can be read now in
the reference room of the New York Public Library. Belloc foretold the
Beveridge plan, the "womb-to-tomb" plan as it has been termed.

Beveridge, a henchman of Lloyd George and Churchill, put over the
compulsory insurance law in 1910 and this brought Belloc to write "The
Servile State." In our own country the New Deal grew out of such social
legislation. And Catholics throughout the country are again accepting
"the lesser of two evils" and trying to apply Christian principles to
it. They fail to see the body of Catholic social teaching of such men as
Fr. Vincent McNabb, G. K. Chesterton, Belloc, Eric Gill and other
distributists, as they came to call themselves, and lose all sight of
*the little way*, which the great modern Saint Therese has pointed out.
They go with the crowd and try to sanctify the pagan teaching of modern
economists. During the Spanish war they saw no other way than that of
Franco in opposition to the Loyalists. They fail to see that there can
be such a thing as a Catholic position. Our Communist brothers are not
so lacking in faith. They continue hammering away at their platform when
they have only one or two representatives in the government. They do not
say, "choose the lesser of two evils, accept the present social order
and sanctify it." They present their positive Marxist program. The
recent upset in the ranks of the Communist party of America is over just
such an issue. Earl Browder is accused of trying to go along with
capitalism, of seeking concordances instead of upholding the pure
Marxist teaching.

Belloc's Visit
--------------

Hilaire Belloc, who foresaw the present shape of things so clearly, is
now living in retirement in Sussex, England. The last time he visited
London it was to see Fr. Vincent McNabb. The last time he came to
America he lectured at Fordham and came one evening to visit The
Catholic Worker, we are happy to say. John Cort and I were invited to
dinner with him by Harry McNeil, then teaching at Fordham, and in honor
of our distinguished guest. Professor McNeil took us to some famous
restaurant to dine, and the meal was of many courses. I hope Hilaire
Belloc did not notice how John Cort, used to the slim meals of the
Catholic Worker (we were feeding 1,500 a day then), reached over to my
plate after every course and finished what I had left. It was an
enormous dinner and I was too stimulated to eat, but John ate
automatically, and quite unconsciously, all of his own and a good part
of mine.

A Suggestion
------------

Why does not Mr. Bruce, the Catholic publisher of Milwaukee, who
achieves so outstanding a success in the circulation of his
publications, bring out "The Servile State" for the benefit of that
great body of Catholics interested in post-war economics?

*Security* for the worker, not ownership; *security* for the
industrialist, the owner, not confiscation--that is what Beveridge plans
and Wallace plans of permanent employment lead to.

There is more vision, more Catholicity in that plan of the Auto Workers
Union, CIO, to buy one of the Ford plants for reconversion and make
prefabricated homes for workers. At least this is a step in the right
direction toward ownership and responsibility.
