% Notes By The Way - July August 1945
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July August 1945, 1, 2, 8.

*Summary: Diary-like short accounts of liturgical celebrations,
retreats, and doings at Maryfarm and Mott Street, including the visit of
two F.B.I. men seeking the whereabouts of a draft evader. Mentions
reading Raissa Maritain's *Adventures in Grace* and a visit to
cloistered Maryknoll sisters which is inspiring. Thoughts on
imprisonment and modesty. Anticipates her pilgrimage to the Shrine of
Mother Cabrini. (DDLW \#413).*

Maryfarm, Easton, Pa.

June 28, Vigil of SS. Peter and Paul. Up at 5:30, first Mass at 6:00,
Prime at 6:30, sung Mass at 7:00. At breakfast we read the epistles and
Gospels from the feast of St. Irenaeus and also of the vigil. Also
Rodriguez on Silence.

Today we mailed the sheep's wool to Mr. Bartlett, Harmony, Maine, to be
washed, carded and spun to knit socks and sweaters for the winter. One
sheep and two lambs have wandered off into the woods and the boys were
out looking for them these last few days.

Last night at supper we had reading at the table about the Cure of Ars.
He sounded rather extreme with his condemnation of dancing and singing
and his endeavors to gain back his parishioners. But I began to think of
the rural slums that we see around us in Easton, Phillipsburg and
Glendon, and I can see well how he had to fight drunkenness and disorder
and the kind of dancing and singing that go with it.

Our retreatants are engaged in all sorts of tasks, gardening, cleaning
the barn, mending the road, baking, sewing, cleaning, etc. Today Mr.
Eichlin brought us three loads of hay under a lowering sky, our
neighbors the Haskows helping, and Stanley and David unloading into our
beautiful old barn.

All the families on the farm have goats and rabbits and chickens. Tamar
and Dave loaned Grace Branham their goat for the summer, and she is
giving three quarts of milk a day. She "came in" on April 3, the day
Tamar's baby was born, and since the cow was dry at that time, the three
quarts of goat's milk certainly came in handy. Now Grace has the goat,
and she sends down the surplus that she cannot use to Fr. Roy and Peter.

Went to see Helen Montague. Her six children have measles right now and
during the winter it was whooping cough. The oldest is seven. What
vigils young mothers must keep, and what fastings! Some of the
retreatants are staying over for a week and they are going to help out
in the household for a few days.

Coming in on the Lehigh train as I write these notes, first there are
hills, then fields, a patchwork of them, haying, wheat ripening. Then
little towns and suburbs of bigger towns with little homes with grape
arbors and goats and chickens and people working and sitting outside
under the trees.

Then the hell and disorder of the industrial plants, and the countryside
laid waste. How can it be that industrialists are not ashamed of this
ghastly disorder?

I forgot to mention that this morning, the last day of the retreat, a
white dove flew in the chapel! Symbol of peace and love, it made us very
happy.

June 29th

Today, two FBI men came in to see Fr. Duffy about a draft evader. He
knew Father and had talked to him on a number of occasions. With the
stand he is taking, this is the last place that he would hang out, with
us fighting conscription as we are, issuing articles on its immorality,
etc. These two men, a Mr. Walsh and a Mr. Seccor, used first a bullying
tone, then an emotional appeal, and then threats, trying to make Father
Duffy promise that he would let them know if he came across the young
man they were looking for. We have had many a man from the FBI come in
to interview us but none so stupid in their behavior as these two.

This evening Boris, a Russian boy from the East side who has been
dropping in since the seaman's strike in 1936, came in. At the beginning
of the war, he made us his insurance beneficiary, and so he has come
unscathed through many a trip, bringing home ribboned cards announcing
he was under fire in the Atlantic, Pacific, Mediterranean and all the
seven seas, wherever they may be.

July 4

Reading Raissa Maritain's "Adventures in Grace" and was much interested
in her account of Pere Clerrisac's spiritual direction. He had a great
admiration for primitive Christianity and the works of the early
Fathers. Jacques and Raissa were reading St. John of the Cross at the
time and were intensely desirous of sanctity, and conscious of the need
for effort to attain it. Pere Clerrisac emphasized God's grace rather
than personal effort. A point which I well understand. It interests me
much to see this struggle of two points of view which goes on still, and
I do not see why there should be any opposition between emphasizing the
need for effort toward personal sanctification and at the same time the
calm faith that God can do all things. "Love God and do as you will." I
love the Maritains for their love for St. John of the Cross.

The chapters of Raissa's book relating to her parents' conversion were
most beautiful. How I would have enjoyed knowing them, visiting them
there in Paris. We are introduced, too, to Peguy, Roualt, Bloy. I am
still reading the book, so this is anything but an adequate review.

Today I visited the cloistered sisters at Maryknoll, had the refreshment
of hearing a conference which Fr. Damasus was giving the sisters. I had
a most enjoyable visit with him later and he is going to bring his
Catholic Action group for a retreat on the farm, which will be a great
joy to us all. Fr. Damasus emphasized waiting, praying, praising the
Lord rather than planning, rebuilding, making world plans. He told the
story of Paula, Paulina and Pontifex Maximus, and the advice of St.
Jerome on how to deal with the noisy child and the cranky old Pontifex
Maximus. "Teach the child," he told Paula, "to climb on the knees of the
cranky old man, and sing softly in his ears the Holy Saturday Alleluias,
and that will probably do more to convert him than all brilliant
arguments." I shall remember that when we sing to the Lord on the farm.

Out of Jail
===

One of our hardest working fellow workers is just out of the Tombs where
he has been taking a rest for the past five days. He says it is an
airless place, all closed in with only slight openings at the very top
of the gigantic windows. It was so unbearably close that the men all
went around in trousers only. But the guards wore their uniforms. One
man died and two went insane on his tier of 65 men. He does not know how
many persons the Tombs contain. They were locked in their cells only
part of the day, during the rest they roamed the corridors. For meals
there were kidney beans, spaghetti, stew, mostly potatoes, "nothing any
good, but then, what do you expect in jail?"

Dress
===

Waiting in a coffee shop out of the rain, for a bus. There was a young
woman waiting there also and from her conversation I discover she is a
driver, waiting to go on duty. She wears toeless back suede pumps with
very high heels, rayon stockings, a black rayon dress, tight and short
with a very low cut neck, with a heavy costume jewelry pin which drags
it down still lower. It made me consider not only the lack of modesty of
modern dress but the need for functional dress. This young woman was
evidently strong, vigorous, and self-respecting. Her life was not an
easy one. She worked long hours, piloting a heavy bus through congested
streets. She was not a harlot. She lived, not by her body, but by hard
labor. But she dressed like a harlot. Probably because she could not
afford to buy work clothes. It is indeed too bad that our styles, our
concept of painted beauty has come to us from Hollywood and from loose
women.

July 5

After a visit such as yesterday's to Maryknoll, I feel free of care,
loosed of all burdens. What a holy and a happy life! *None* was recited
at 3:00 in English; vespers sung at 5:00 in Latin; supper, then Fr.
Damasus' conference; then recreation when we all had a talk together;
then compline.

Mass the next morning was at 6:45 and I caught the 7:45 train. The river
was beautiful, so calm and hazy one could not see the opposite shore.
Bouncing Betsy and sweet clover made the air sweet.

Easton Again
===

July 21

It is 9:00 in the evening and still light enough to sit outside and
write. An almost full moon is coming up over the hill. I am sitting on
Tamar's front step, between the forsythia bush and the mulberry tree,
watching the kittens. The mother cat is chasing crickets. It is clear up
here but over the town there is a pall of smoke from all the factories.
An airplane flies overhead, a night bird cries out, the ewe under the
cherry trees, now returned, bleats for her two adventurous lambs. The
other sheep, which Fr. Magee gave Tamar and David for a wedding present,
runs around loose with the little kid of the Angora goat. Every now and
then they come up on the porch of the little cabin I occupy on the farm
and stampede around. The other night I was saying my prayers, and the
big round sheep with the long solemn face and the tiny little kid stood
at the door looking in at me with great interest. We owe a great debt of
gratitude to that sheep. We have 16 skeins of wool, which cost only
\$1.80 to spin. With the three additional sheep we will be able to weave
quite a bit of cloth. We have not as yet found a loom and are looking
for a small one which can be moved around from room to room on the farm.

Weather
===

During the month there was a regular twister here in Easton and
Phillipsburg. One house was washed down a cliff and six people killed.
Our own wheat crop was ruined and the corn, cabbage and tomatoes were
spoiled for miles around. The farmers have suffered a great loss. The
storm lasted for four hours. Six inches of rain fell and terrible hail
for a noisy half hour broke the windows in the greenhouses near the
town. The lightning struck many small trees on our place but through it
all the children on the farm slept and the animals--cow, heifer, calf,
sheep, goats and pigs, bowed their heads meekly out there in the fields
and "weathered" the storm. They are an example to us.

Mott Street Again
===

Up at 6:00 and down to St. Andrew's for 7 o'clock Mass which Msgr.
Nelson says. He hears confessions after this Mass every morning. Then a
leisurely walk through Columbus Square and Mulberry Park where cats and
fellow workers from our breadline sleep side by each these hot days and
nights. Then a pause to talk to Katie on the corner about some
assistance we need to give to some of our poorer neighbors.

Katie has just been on pilgrimage, an annual event with her and her
sister and daughter and other relatives who make up a group from Mott
street. Another group go from Mulberry street.

Every year on the eve of the feast of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel, pilgrims
gather from the Italian parishes in all five boroughs and walk to the
church on First avenue and 115^th^ St. Katie and her sister go in socks,
two or three pair, but the younger women go barefoot. They start out
from Hester street, which is our corner, at 10:00 at night, and walk
over to First avenue and then straight up to 115^th^ St. They arrive at
their destination at 1:00 in the morning in time for the first Mass of
the feast and there is a beautiful sermon and all receive communion and
then make their way home again by car or bus for breakfast and a few
hours of sleep. Katie was on the job at 6:00 the next morning and
working all day selling vegetables and she never felt tired at all, she
said.

"It was so beautiful, walking up along the river, and the air was so
fresh and cool," she said. "We stopped to look at the water and at the
boats and we enjoyed ourselves. We do this every year--it is a promise
we all make to Our Lady of Mt. Carmel. Next year, you go with us, if we
are alive," she added.

Pilgrimage
===

Because we have long been planning a pilgrimage, and because we missed
this one, we will make a pilgrimage on the Feast of the Seven Sorrows of
the Blessed Virgin Mary, September 15, to the Shrine of Mother Cabrini,
walking from the Catholic Worker headquarters to the shrine at 701
Washington Ave. (around 185^th^ St.), where the body of this American
saint, Italian born, rests today. If we leave at ten in the evening,
Katie, the experienced pilgrim assures us, we will arrive in time for
the first Mass the next morning. This is walking at pilgrim's pace, of
course. We chose this time of the year, since it is easier to walk
lightly clad than it is in the winter, impeded by many garments.

We will make the pilgrimage to beg our Blessed Mother to intercede for
us to bring about peace.
