% Room For Christ
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1945, 2.

*Summary: Meditation on hospitality, that is, seeing Christ in those
around us, ministering to others the way Christ ministered and was
ministered to; with examples of this from the Scriptures. Encourages all
to some form of the "privilege" of hospitality not because people remind
us of Christ "but because they are Christ." (DDLW \#416).*

It is no use to say that we are born two thousand years too late to give
room to Christ. Nor will those who live at the end of the world have
been born too late. Christ is always with us, always asking for room in
our hearts.

But now it is with the voice of our contemporaries that he speaks, with
the eyes of store clerks, factory workers and children that he gazes;
with the hands of office workers, slum dwellers and suburban housewives
that he gives. It is with the feet of soldiers and tramps that he walks,
and with the heart of anyone in need that he longs for shelter. And
giving shelter or food to anyone who asks for it, or needs it, is giving
it to Christ.

We can do now what those who knew Him in the days of His flesh did. I'm
sure that the shepherds did not adore and then go away to leave Mary and
her Child in the stable, but somehow found them room, even though what
they had to offer might have been primitive enough. All that the friends
of Christ did in His life-time for Him we can do. Peter's mother-in-law
hastened to cook a meal for Him, and if anything in the Gospels can be
inferred, it is surely that she gave the very best she had, with no
thought of extravagance. Matthew made a feast for Him and invited the
whole town, so that the house was in an uproar of enjoyment, and the
straight-laced Pharisees--the good people--were scandalized. So did
Zaccheus, only this time Christ invited Himself and sent Zaccheus home
to get things ready. The people of Samaria, despised and isolated, were
overjoyed to give Him hospitality, and for days He walked and ate and
slept among them. And the loveliest of all relationships in Christ's
life, after His relationship with his Mother, is His friendship with
Martha, Mary and Lazarus and the continual hospitality He found with
them--for there was always a bed for Him there, always a welcome, always
a meal. It is a staggering thought that there were once two sisters and
a brother whom Jesus looked on almost as His family and where He found a
second home, where Martha got on with her work, bustling round in her
house-proud way, and Mary simply sat in silence with Him.

If we hadn't got Christ's own words for it, it would seem raving lunacy
to believe that if I offer a bed and food and hospitality for
Christmas--or any other time, for that matter--to some man, woman or
child, I am replaying the part of Lazarus or Martha or Mary and that my
guest is Christ. There is nothing to show it, perhaps. There are no
haloes already glowing round their heads--at least none that human eyes
can see. It is not likely that I shall be vouchsafed the vision of
Elizabeth of Hungary, who put the leper in her bed and later, going to
tend him, saw no longer the leper's stricken face, but the face of
Christ. The part of a Peter Claver, who gave a stricken Negro his bed
and slept on the floor at his side, is more likely to be ours. For Peter
Claver never saw anything with his bodily eyes except the exhausted
black faces of the Negroes; He had only faith in Christ's own words that
these people were Christ. And when the Negroes he had induced to help
him once ran from the room, panicstricken before the disgusting sight of
some sickness, he was astonished. "You mustn't go," he said, and you can
still hear his surprise that anyone could forget such a truth; "You
mustn't leave him--it is Christ."

Some time ago I saw the death notice of a sergeant-pilot who had been
killed on active service. After the usual information, a message was
added which, I imagine, is likely to be initiated. It said that anyone
who had ever known the dead boy would always be sure of a welcome at his
parents' home. So, even now that the war is over, the father and mother
will go on taking in strangers for the simple reason that they will be
reminded of their dead son by the friends he made.

That is rather like the custom that existed among the first generations
of Christians, when faith was a bright fire that warmed more than those
who kept it burning. In every house then a room was kept ready for any
stranger who might ask for shelter; it was even called "the strangers'
room": and this not because these people, like the parents of the dead
airman, thought they could trace something of someone they loved in the
stranger who used it, not because the man or woman to whom they gave
shelter reminded them of Christ, but because--plain and simple and
stupendous fact--he was Christ.

It would be foolish to pretend that it is easy always to remember this.
If everyone were holy and handsome, with "alter Christus" shining in
neon lighting from them, it would be easy to see Christ in everyone. If
Mary had appeared in Bethlehem clothed, as St. John says, with the sun,
a crown of twelve stars on her head and the moon under her feet, then
people would have fought to make room for her. But that was not God's
way for her nor is it Christ's way for Himself now when He is disguised
under every type of humanity that treads the earth.

To see how far one realizes this, it is a good thing to ask honestly
what you would do, or have done, when a beggar asked at your house for
food. Would you--or did you--give it on an old cracked plate, thinking
that was good enough? Do you think that Martha and Mary thought that the
old and chipped dish was good for their guest?

In Christ's human life there were always a few who made up for the
neglect of the crowd.

The shepherds did it, their hurrying to the crib atoned for the people
who would flee from Christ.

The wise men did it; their journey across the world made up for those
who refused to stir one hand's breadth from the routine of their lives
to go to Christ. Even the gifts that the wise men brought have in
themselves an obscure recompense and atonement for what would follow
later in this Child's life. For they brought gold, the king's emblem, to
make up for the crown of thorns that He would wear; they offered
incense, the symbol of praise, to make up for the mockery and the
spitting; they gave Him myrrh, to heal and soothe, and He was wounded
from head to foot and no one bathed his wounds. The women at the foot of
the cross did it too, making up for the crowd who stood by and sneered.

We can do it too, exactly as they did. We are not born too late. We do
it by seeing Christ and serving Christ in friends and strangers, in
everyone we come in contact with. While almost no one is unable to give
some hospitality or help to others, those for whom it is really
impossible are not debarred from giving room to Christ, because, to take
the simplest of examples, in those they live with or work with is Christ
disguised. All our life is bound up with other people; for almost all of
us happiness and unhappiness are conditioned by our relationship with
other people. What a simplification of life it would be if we forced
ourselves to see that everywhere we go is Christ, wearing out socks we
have to darn, eating the food we have to cook, laughing with us, silent
with us, sleeping with us.

All this can be proved, if proof is needed, by the doctrines of the
Church. We can talk about Christ's Mystical Body, about the vine and the
branches, about the Communion of Saints. But Christ Himself has proved
it for us, and no one has to go further than that. For He said that a
glass of water given to a beggar was given to Him. He made heaven hinge
on the way we act towards Him in his disguise of commonplace, frail and
ordinary human beings.

Did you give me food when I was hungry? Did you give me something to
drink when I was thirsty? Did you take me in when I was homeless and a
stranger? Did you give me clothes when my own were all rags? Did you
come to see me when I was sick or in prison or in trouble?

And to those who say, aghast, that they never had a chance to do such a
thing, that they lived two thousand years too late, he will say again
what they had the chance of knowing all their lives, that if these
things were done for the very least of his brethren they were done for
Him.

For a total Christian the goad of duty is not needed--always prodding
him to perform this or that good deed. It is not a duty to help Christ,
it is a privilege. Is it likely that Martha and Mary sat back and
considered that they had done all that was expected of them--is it
likely that Peter's mother-in-law grudgingly served the chicken she had
meant to keep till Sunday because she thought it was "her duty"? She did
it gladly: she would have served ten chickens if she had them.

If that is the way they gave hospitality to Christ it is certain that is
the way it should still be given. Not for the sake of humanity. Not
because it might be Christ who stays with us, comes to see us, takes up
our time. Not because these people remind us of Christ, as those
soldiers and airmen remind the parents of their son, but because they
are Christ, asking us to find room for Him exactly as He did at the
first Christmas.
