% On Pilgrimage - February 1946
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1946, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: Explains why she is changing the name of the column to *On
Pilgrimage.* A diary-like record of people and events around the Worker
in January 1946--looting in the neighborhood, running out of coal,
medical visits, butchering a hog. Comments on worthwhile work. (DDLW
\#419).*

I am selecting a new name for my column, since there are *Day After
Days* and *Notes By the Way* in other papers. We should always be
thinking of ourselves as pilgrims anyway.

When things get tough, I like to recall St. Teresa's "Life is a night
spent in an uncomfortable inn." And from the gay way she wrote of her
adventures, she agreed also with St. Catherine of Sienna, who said: "All
the Way to Heaven is Heaven, for He said, I am the Way."

*January 1*

Last night I kept vigil at the Cenacle of St. Regis up on Riverside
Drive. Just before midnight the nuns started singing, "Parce Domine,
parce populo," before the clamor started outside which ushered in the
new year.

Today, Father Fiorentino and Miss Brady and Carmela came down to wait on
tables and serve the men on the breadline.

*January 2*

First rabid anti-semitism in the neighborhood. Anti-foreign in general,
since two Jewish

shops and two Chinese shops had their windows smashed in the New Year's
eve celebrations.

The little shopkeeper down the street was grief-stricken and told me how
many robberies there were during the year. Just the night before last he
lost a hundred dollars' worth of stock at least.

And he makes his living in pennies. Looting and stoning. It will cost
him $175 to put up grills before the doors and windows to protect him
from the hooliganism in the neighborhood. This is new to us, and we have
been here for ten years.

*January 3*

Today read most of the psalms traveling on the subway between dentists.
Had to go to a

specialist about an infected jaw. A cold day and we are out of coal
again. Visited Julia at the Art Students League on 57th Street before I
went to the dentist and saw her figures in limestone of Mary and
Joseph's betrothal. Very Jewish, warm and tender. Bob Sukoski was in
tonight for supper and it made us all feel terrible to see his empty
sleeve and the other arm crippled, too.

He has a strong spirit, however. God knows just how much each one of us
can take. Another veteran came in and helped serve. He brought a
rabbit-skin jacket from Germany, and we wished he had left it there,
they are needing it so now. However it is keeping the cold from John
Rider, who is with us after a terrible siege of bronchitis and looking
very thin indeed. The trouble with

getting sick on the Bowery is you can lie in a hotel room for days and
starve to death.

*January 4*

Two more veterans in, bringing clothes. Herb Walsh and Jack English help
with visitors, and so Jack, who is doing cooking also, burned the soup.
Five more windows broken, this time Italian.

*January 5*

A mild spring day. We had the station wagon in to help mail out the
paper, and used it to move coal which Msgr. Nelson gave us from St.
Andrew's rectory. It was an all morning job.

I drove, six men loaded. There were about three ton. We were black when
we got through.

*January 7*

Paper went to press and afterward Marge and I took a walk through the
East side, buying herring and hair brushes and pricing Hebrew
dictionaries for Miss Branham, whose ambition 
it is to read the psalms in Hebrew.

*January 9*

John Gavinolovitch, one of our Seattle friends, called. He had been
shipwrecked off the coast of Italy on the way to Jugoslavia with a load
of wheat, seven thousand ton. During these latter years of the war he
has been shipping out from the East Coast and bringing clothes and what
food he could to different countries. Now he is on his way home. I met
him at Grand Central station, Thompson's, and had supper before he
caught his train.

*January 10*

Today I was invited to a luncheon at Schraffts, a tea at one of the
housing projects with Mrs. Simkovitch and her committee on housing, and
to a Carlo Tresca meeting at Cooper Union. Could not get to any of them,
what with driving the car and delivering the paper to the postoffice. If
some of the returned ambulance drivers and other veterans do not get
their driving licenses renewed! Grace MaGuire donated more rabbits. The
food here is as good as that at Schraffs, I am sure.

*January 13*

On the farm these last few days. Today being Sunday, Tamar and I went
for a drive along the river, calling for the Gotts on the way home to
come to supper and a little celebration. The burning of the Christmas
greens before the fireplace. Richard Strachan, one of our C.O. jailbirds
and now in the seminary, donated a phonograph and we have three books of
Gregorian records, which we play to our visitors. Fr. Ehmann's choir at
St. Bernard's Seminary, Rochester, is magnificent. They sing the first
and second Masses.

*January 14*

Ten above zero these days in the country. When there is no wind it is
good to get out and walk with Tamar and her baby. Rebecca down the road,
through the fields past the little Italian cemetery and Eiclen's brook
where the watercress will be ready for picking next month.

Eileen is reading us Newman's "Idea of a University" at meals. Peter,
dressed in maroon-colored stocking cap and a sheepskin coat, sits and
eats huge bowls of oatmeal and nods approvingly. At Athens they planted
groves of trees as part of the student's work and so this spring we will
make everyone who comes to Maryfarm plant trees, dig up around trees,
cart manure for trees, cultivating the ones we have besides putting in
new ones.

Last year on one of our walks we picked up a basket of black walnuts
which had been rotting on the ground all winter. We left a dozen or so
in the basket and they sprouted beautifully. Now they are planted along
the path.

*January 15*

A smell of snow in the air. Now we are in the depths of winter. Sixteen
above zero, and we justify our wearing many clothes to bed thinking of
St. Vincent Ferrer, who never believed in taking off his clothes at all.
A waste of time. Today is the feast of St. Paul the hermit, the patron

of weavers, because he wove baskets, I suppose. In his honor we carded
goats' hair today. Blandine, who came down from Canada to teach us, did
a beautiful job of washing and getting the wool ready for spinning. Now
Irene is up with her for a month, learning weaving.

*January 21*

Cold and rainy. Today we slaughtered the hog, John Filliger shooting him
with a thirty- two revolver, which was not effective, and then cutting
his throat. We borrowed block and tackle and scrapers from the
neighbors, set up an old bathtub under the cherry trees by the print
shop and made a fire under it to boil the water. We were six months too
late in the killing, John said, judging from the toughness of the job of
removing the hair. The scraping took a good part of the day. Then John
cleaned it, quartered it, and stored it in the milk house, to continue
the job tomorrow. John, Joe Cotter and Dave Hennessey worked valiantly
with some of Father's good wine to stave off the cold. Stanley is
running off a fourâ€“page leaflet, one of a series to be gotten out this
year. We hope to bring them out monthly on what we call our Penny Press.

*January 23*

Bitter cold, five above zero. Father is visiting in Philadelphia and
Baltimore, so a group are

walking in to Mass. The snow with its crust sounds like tinkling glass
as we walk on it. The roads are so icy I am afraid to venture on them.

*January 24*

To the clinic with Ann Thornton, where we sat for three hours. It gave
me a good chance to read de Rougemont's "The Devil's Share," a superb
book. After a beautiful clear morning, it snowed and sleeted all
afternoon.

*January 26*

In town again, and an epidemic of rats, evidently flooded out of the
B.M.T subway. Ever since the recent flood in the Broadway subway they
have been our companions. They walk over my desk, leaving footprints.
They sit on the edge of the waste-paper basket, sniffing for apple cores
from Fr. Duffy's healthful lunch. They ate a quarter of a loaf of Hans'
whole wheat bread.

One ran over Marge's hand as she cut bread on the closet shelf. Bill
Duffy killed two on the stairs with a rubber hose. One gray monster sat
on the edge of the bench with us while we talked with Fr. Burke, Oblate
of Mary Immaculate, just out of prison camp in the Philippines. As we
watched the rat (the bench was quite a few yards long) Father told us
how stewed cat tasted. Like chicken. He had never eaten rat.

One young soldier visiting us said sadly that now that he had lived in
the Army in Europe,

sleeping on the ground in mid-winter, he had learned all the things he
can do without. And now he was coming back to take a job to earn the
money for the things that he had learned he could do without. We are
trying to persuade him to go to the Benedictine school at Benet Lake,
Wisconsin, for the coming year. If a job cannot be considered a work of
mercy or part of the apostolate, it's not worth working at . After all,
a single man has a good deal of choice along those lines.
