% On Pilgrimage - April 1946
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1946, 2.

*Summary: Describes the surroundings at Maryfarm in Easton, PA: the
animals, including the goat genealogy, the workers and the types of
services they render,a welcome change in schedule and the new St. Joseph
outdoor shrine. Boasts of the visitors,readers of the Catholic Worker,
who come to discuss by the hundreds. (DDLW \#423).*

The 29th of March, and a perfect Spring day here at Maryfarm. A blue
haze hangs over the valley below me, the cherry and pear trees below the
little cabin where I write are about to burst into bloom. Here on the
porch, two leaping baby goats are a great distraction. They are one week
old today and, a buck and a doe, the young of Susie, born last year on
April 3, the very day my little granddaughter was born. Their mother is
giving two quarts of milk a day, which nourishes the granddaughter and
partly nourishes the orphan children, three of them, of Susie's mother
Chloe, who gave birth to the kids day before yesterday and died the day
after. I say partly nourishes, because a young goat drinks a quart and a
half of milk a day, and we supplement Susie's milk with canned milk for
the orphans. Everyone asks for news of the farm, as a farm, and I always
think of the animals, because although we call this place Maryfarm, we
are not doing a great deal of farming.

Ever since seeing William Cobbett's *American Gardener* (a very rare book
which deserves reprinting and is on par with his *Cottage
Economy),* I have thought how necessary it is for families who wish to
settle on the land to learn gardening and small husbandry and some
craft. We should be thinking in terms of village economy instead of farm
economy. There is such a need for shoemakers, carpenters, stone masons,
gardeners, etc. It is harder to get shelter these days than it is to get
food.

Right now we have on Maryfarm an assortment of animals. There are three
families on the farm and each has goats and chickens. In addition, my
daughter has a cow and a sheep. The retreat house has two buck kids to
raise for food; two sheep to shear for wool, and two heifers to raise
for milk cows; and, aside from the baby goats, my son-in-law takes care
of these animals. Joe Cotter, who has been doing all the electrical work
around the place, takes care of rabbits, and John Filliger, who has come
back to help us after an absence for the duration, takes care of the one
horse, Dolly, who is blind and for whom we paid \$40. Together with
Dolly and a neighbor's horse, John has spread manure, cleared the fields
of rocks, and plowed a garden patch and two little fields for potatoes.
As usual, we plan to concentrate on roots, trying to get potatoes,
turnips, cabbage, carrots, beets and onions, all of which can be stored
without canning. Angela Costanza, one of the staff of the retreat house,
aims to put up tomato paste in quantities this year. But what fruit we
will get will go on the table during the season for it. Last year the
late frosts and the terrible storms of midsummer, which washed out roads
and shredded the cabbage in the fields and destroyed trees, not only
destroyed our wheat fields, but also our berries, cherries and pears.

(Hans Tunneson, our Norwegian seaman fellow worker, has just finished
fencing in a little garden around the cherry trees for the goats, and
soon the twins and the triplets will be gamboling there together.)

God has greatly blessed us these last two weeks in sending us Fr. Thomas
Benedict Grace to be our chaplain for the month. Fr. Roy is still on an
extended tour of the South. Fr. Grace has been a chaplain in the
Canadian air corps during the war and does not have to report back to
duty for another month. He has been busy, indeed, helping us around
the retreat house, and his suggestions and direction have been
invaluable. There is now a little shrine to St. Joseph up on the crest
of the first hill, on the picnic grounds, only as yet we have no St.
Joseph of proper size to put in it. We need a statue about ten inches
high and we are hoping to get one of our artists to carve it. Our large
statue of St. Joseph, which Tina de Aragon made for us, is too large for
the shrine.

What a peaceful and joyful day! We have changed our hour of
meditation to quarter of six in the morning, now that Spring is here and
it is wonderful to get up in the early light, feed the baby goats and
then spend that quiet hour before Mass in our beautiful barn chapel. Now
at ten, Irene and Ruth are out in the field putting in onion sets, a
long and arduous job. John is cutting up potatoes with the help of
Stanley's brother, Walter; Stanley is running off cards on his press;
Hans is working at fencing, Joe at electrical work in the big room in
the attic which now has two immense dormer windows in it; Duncan is
making dinner, and Father and Joe Connell are downtown shopping and
seeing about repairs for the car. Father is interested in painting, and
the stone house is all newly whitewashed. Our family at the retreat
house numbers fifteen, and as I write I see a shirt-sleeved man carrying
a suitcase trudging up the road, and this morning a cab drove up with a
young, colored girl come to visit us for a while. And so it goes here,
people coming and going, many visitors, many readers of the paper coming
to discuss ideas. Never was there such a paper as THE CATHOLIC WORKER, I
am sure! Do the readers of the *Commonweal, America, Nation, New
Republic, Common Sense,* come to spend weeks, and by the hundreds, at
that? It is not only the farm with its retreat house that receives such
constant visitors. There were two hundred and fifty retreatants last
year. No, it is also in the city, at the House of Hospitality. Peter
Maurin started many people on pilgrimages when he began talking about
Houses of Hospitality and Agronomic Universities fifteen years ago.

Retreat
===

The Spring retreat will begin Sunday night or Monday, April 22, and
continue through the week. Please let us know if you are coming so that
we will have a general idea of how many to prepare for.

Maryfarm is two and a half miles south of Easton, Pennsylvania, and can
be reached by Lehigh Valley from Pennsylvania station, New York, and by
many bus lines. The trip takes an hour and three-quarters and the fare
is three dollars and eighty cents a round trip, either by bus or by
train. When you reach Easton either take a cab, if you have a dollar, or
telephone Easton 9479 and if the 1935 Ford station wagon is working, we
will pick you up.
