% *On Pilgrimage* 
% Dorothy Day

*Summary: Still awaiting Tamar's baby, she mentions neighborly visits
and reflects on her family history, and criticizes poorly written books
about Mary and the saints. Writes of "feasting and fasting" as Lent
begins, enumerating the many mentions of food in the Bible and quoting
Dostoevsky's character Father Zossima on the importance of fasting.
(DDLW \#477).*

February
---

February 4th  
Feast of St. Agatha  
18 above  
Steady snow all day

For a long time there are no visitors, then suddenly the day is full of
them. Everyone is wondering when T. is going to have her baby. The
mailman asks, neighbors send over presents. This morning Bud Yost came
in with a bundle of baby clothes outgrown by some of his nieces and
nephews. His mother is so young a looking woman that I had taken her for
her husband's daughter at the apple paring last fall. They are local
people and the farms now priced at $1,200 are worth, to them, $800;
and this one, which we are renting priced at $2,500, worth $1,200.
They themselves have been renters all their lives until suddenly the
father, coming into a little legacy, was able to make a down payment on
a place selling for $1,500. He works, his wife cans at home and sells
her produce, the children, a son and two daughters, all help too. The
son who visited us this morning has been cutting pulpwood.

One cannot help thinking that the men have an easier time of it. It is
wonderful to work out on such a day as this with the snow falling
lightly all around, chopping wood, dragging in fodder, working with the
animals. Women are held pretty constantly to the house. Tomorrow I shall
take to reading and pacing the porch, one of my favorite occupations.
I've been reading the psalms for Matins and Vespers and by taking a
stroll mid morning or afternoon I can get in the Little Hours. Susie is
so crazy to get out, and suffers so with cold when she does.

I was reading in *David Copperfield* how Betsy Trotwood paced the floor
for two hours while she unravelled problems, and at eighty could still
do a five mile stretch! She reminds me of my mother-in-law who at eighty
plays croquet, walks, swims, listens to Churchill on the radio and in
general is a vigorous old English woman.

In the afternoon Joe came in--he is moving and the problem of packing,
finding a place for himself, wife and four small children is a hard one.
He brought jam from his wife. Then in the late afternoon, Alma and
Leslie who are on the next farm came, Leslie to fetch home a goat he
was buying from Joe, and Alma to take a lesson in hooked rug making
and knitting. Her baby will be due next August. She is a wonderful
little housekeeper and cooks and cans and bakes. Their house is of logs,
very uneven, low-ceilinged, irregular, only 3 of the 7 rooms
inhabitable. But they are managing. She canned twenty roosters last
week. Last month they slaughtered and the other day Leslie brought us
some of her scrapple. She boiled the head and feet, picked the bones and
ground them up, mixed them with home ground corn meal and cooked them
like mush. The scrapple comes out of the pan in a firm cake to be sliced
down and fried.

Little by little I learn more about the neighborhood. No Negro families
for instance. All of Dutch or Irish descent. No unions. Stocking
factory, Victor plant and mines all unorganized. This week there is an
election to decide whether the workers in the Victor plant want a union.
The local paper in an editorial urges against it. How can a union
organizer get in one of these tight little communities. It certainly
demands courage. And in spite of Republican propaganda to the contrary,
it is not just "business is business," and the desire to increase the
dues-paying members of a great union like the C.I.O. Auto Workers, of
which this will be an affiliate. Power, perhaps, and the desire of the
worker to feel his strength, his importance, his responsibility as a
man, and not just a wage slave,--this desire motivates men.

Yesterday we went to Dr. Tobias--T. has been going weekly to him. His
office is in a store just off the square. There were a dozen there
before us. All poor people, all shabbily dressed, all workers of farm
background.

There was one young mother with five children. When T. has her two
trying to tear up magazines and spit on the windows, she is not at all
embarrassed because all the mothers bring their children everywhere.
They have to.

Dr. Tobias is an all around family doctor, a tired, youngish man, full
of common-sense. He dispenses calcium pills to the expectant mothers,
cough medicine to the children, etc. No prescriptions or going to the
drug store. His charge for delivering the baby is $35. The hospital
"The Pines," four dollars a day for the mother, one dollar for the baby.

Friday, February 6th

Feast of St. Dorothy

St. Dorothy is the patroness of gardeners and when I think of a garden I
think of a garden enclosed, as the Blessed Mother is described to be. A
wall is a lovely thing--with fruit trees and hollyhocks and tall things
growing against it. A garden not too small to have a grape arbor at one
end where there can be tables and chairs and benches for outdoor meals.
Such a garden is for women and children so that there can be no straying
of little feet.

St. Dorothy, pray we may one day have such a garden, that we may settle
long enough in one place to put roots in, if not our own, since we are
pilgrims, at least a tree's, a vine's.

One of the vows the Benedictine's take is stability. And there is such
wandering today, from job to job, from home to home. Most people want a
settled place, but economic circumstances make it hard.

Our life is made up of meals. We have been making beautiful cakes, pies
and cookies, much to the delight of David and the children, to vary our
monotonous diet.

Susie has a good appetite and ploughs her way sturdily through a
breakfast of wheat cereal, apple sauce and a full 8 oz. of milk. But
Becky eats like a bird. A bit of whole wheat bread, a piece of apple, a
handful of wheat when the chickens are fed, a piece of raw carrot, a bit
of raw oats. She has a great liking for these things. T., when she was a
baby, refused a bottle after she was weaned at 10 months, drank only a
few swallows of milk, and made each meal a torment. Then when she had to
be away from home at the hospital for a week with abscessed ears, she
almost starved, since she would not take a bottle and no one had the
patience to feed her. I can remember bringing her home from the hospital
looking gaunt and starved, weeping over her all the way. Then she was so
ravenous I had to get up in the middle of the night to make cereal for
her. She had bronchitis that winter and I worried over her constantly. I
remember one doctor telling me, "Throw away your thermometer. Babies are
hard to kill." He was a clinic doctor and saw many sicker than mine.

O the generations of mothers! Of women and babies! I have pictures of my
mother's mother and grandmother on the one hand, and myself and daughter
and granddaughter. Six generations of us.

My mother used to nurse her baby sister as a little girl, and so had a
taste of motherhood long before she had five of her own. That little
sister died last year, and my mother four years ago. Charity Washburn,
Anna Satterlee, Grace Day, Dorothy, Tamar, Rebecca, six generations
living during wars, revolutions, earthquakes, hurricane, and more war.

My mother said as she was dying--"I have lived enough," But up to a week
or so before her death her appetite for life had not diminished. She
loved life, passionately, intensely, wanted to live, and felt that life
was full, was thrilling even at seventy-five.

Her last child was born when she was forty-five and of course I thought
of her as old then. She was not well after that for a year or so, and
every morning I used to get up with my brother at four thirty--change
him, feed him and put him into a warm carriage beside the fireplace in
the library to take another nap while I studied Virgil before getting
breakfast. I was in my last year of the Robert Waller high school in
Chicago and I loved Latin so much that I read the Ecloques besides the
Aenead.

Our teacher, Dr. Matheson so inspired us with enthusiasm that he offered
to teach Greek to any who wished to remain an additional period after
school. A number of us did, and got through Xenophon and the New
Testament. There are not many such teachers today.

I should not have studied half so well if I had not had that baby to get
up with in the morning.

We were very poor then. My father's newspaper had failed and he was
without a job for some time. It was not long after that he got another
post as racing editor of a New York paper and our difficulties were
over--we had recovered as we had many times before. Our status was that
of most professional people in the cities. We owned nothing, only
personal effects --we had nothing in the bank. We lived from week to
week. We were poor but we lived as though rich. Our standards were
American standards. On my father's side there were farmers and doctors
in the South, Tennessee. The farmers were land owners but the moneyless
doctor was the respected one.

My mother's people, on the other hand, were whalers, or mill workers.
Her father had been a chairmaker, so his discharge from the army stated,
after the Civil War, but he had been a war prisoner, had tuberculosis,
and died young, leaving a widow with five children, so my mother at
fourteen went to work in the local shirt factory.

Workers and scholars. How mixed up we are in the United States. And what
misconceptions the rest of the world has of us. There is so much pose of
prosperity in our big cities that when one sees a farm mother with
home-made clothes on herself and her brood of children in a city bus
station, she has the appearance of destitution. And yet she and her
husband may own their acres, their home, their means of production.

In the slums, in the most crowded noisome tenements, young girls emerge
for work as for the evening's pleasure dressed like movie stars.

Taking people all in all, it is hard to tell who are the oppressed, who
are the proletariat, the dispossessed, the propertyless. Until suddenly
(if there is peace, no threat of war, no increase of armaments) there is
a depression, wheels stop turning, chimneys stop smoking, and 14 million
people are out of work.

And that fear hits the countryside too. The stocking factory has
closed down. The sand mines are idle. The Victor plant is pulling
out. No cash income. How will we live? It is lonely in the country.
There is relief in the city. There everyone's disaster is no one's
disaster. Misery loves company. And so the farms are deserted.

Well, how do you live without cash anyway?

February 11

I began to write this on the Feast of our Lady of Lourdes when I went to
my bookshelves to find something about our Blessed Mother to read. I
picked up two books, opened them for a bit and closed them both with
horror and sat down with my missal instead. I'm not going to mention
the names of the two books nor their authors. I'd prefer to talk of the
splendid hagiography of Fr. Thurston and Donald Attwater (the reused
Butler), Gheon, Ida Coudenhove, Margaret Monroe and other modern
writers.

In the first of the two books aforementioned, the saintwriter declares
that the Blessed Mother, with lighted torches, was seen setting fire to
a dance hall, where couples were carousing, and burning it to the ground
with 400 people therein! The second book had a little chapter about
eating: "The saints went to their meals sighing. St. Alphonsus, when
sitting down, would think only of the sufferings of the souls in
purgatory, and with tears would beseech Our Lady to accept the
mortifications he imposed upon himself during meals. Blessed de Montford
sometimes shed tears and sobbed bitterly when sitting at table to eat.
If such have been the feelings of the saints what shall we say of those
of Mary? ... St. Jerome (in a letter to Heliodorus) said that this
wonderful child only took, toward evening, the food which an angel was
wont to bring her."

No wonder no one wants to be a saint. But we are called to be saints--we
are the sons of God!

Thank God for the missal! I turned for refreshment to the Mass for the
day.

"The flowers have appeared in our land, the time of pruning is come."
(That is literally true. In the country they have been pruning the fruit
trees and grapevines the early part of this month.) "Arise, my love, my
beautiful one and come; my dove in the clefts of the rock, in the hollow
places of the wall. Show me thy face, let thy voice sound in my ears,
for thy voice is sweet and thy face comely."

Filled with joy at this so different address to the Mother of Christ, I
went on reading that chapter in the Canticle of Canticles--"Behold my
beloved speaketh to me: Arise, make haste, my love, my dove, my
beautiful one, and come. For winter is now past, the rain is over and
gone. The fig tree hath put forth her green figs; the vines are in
flower with their sweet smell. Arise, my love, my beautiful one and
come.... Catch us the little foxes, that destroy the vines."

The little foxes--it is about the little foxes I wish to write --the
little foxes that destroy the beautiful vines that prevent the grapes
from coming to fruition. In other words, the little misconceptions of
feastings and fastings that keep us from rejoicing in true devotion
during this season of Lent.

In the Mass of this very day there were two prayers, begging for "health
both of soul and of body" and "that physical and moral health which we
desire." I want to write about feasting and fasting and the joys and
beauties of both, because, although this is a feast day on which I begin
this writing, it is also Ash Wednesday.

How much there was about food in the Old Testament. Adam raised food for
himself and Eve, and did it with pleasure. After the fall of Adam,
ploughing and seeding and harvesting, earning one's daily bread either
as a husbandman like Cain or shepherd like Abel, was a difficult and
painful affair. Sacrifices of food were offered to the Lord, whether of
beasts, or of bread and wine--food because it represented our life--what
we live by. We offered our lives to the Lord. We also lust after food as
Esau did when he sold his birthright for a mess of pottage. The
Israelites complained of their food in the desert and yearned after the
flesh pots of Egypt even with the bondage and slavery it entailed, even
though the Lord fed them bread from heaven and water from the Rock, food
that had every delight and taste.

Who can forget the widow's cruse of oil which was never diminished; Ruth
gleaning in the corn; Daniel and his three companions living on "oats,
pea beans and barley corn"; and the meal that was served Daniel in the
lion's den by the prophet Habacuc? St. Bonaventure said that after the
long fast of our Lord in the desert, when the angels came to minister to
Him, they went first to the blessed Mother to see what she had on her
stove, and got the soup she had prepared and transported it to our Lord,
who relished it the more because His Mother had prepared it. Of course.

How many times fasting is enjoined in the Old Testament. Whenever there
was war, as penalty for their sins, the Jews were told to fast, and to
fast joyfully, not with long faces. Over and over again the chosen
people were urged to do penance, to fast, even their cattle, not only as
a sign of sorrow for sins, an offering to God of their life, but also to
have the means to show their love for their brother who was afflicted.

How shall we have the means to help our brother who is in need? We can
do without those unnecessary things which become habits, cigarettes,
liquor, coffee, tea, candy, sodas, soft drinks and those foods at meals
which only titillate the palate. We all have these habits, the youngest
and the oldest. And we have to die to ourselves in order to live, we
have to put off the old man and put on Christ. That it is so
hard, that it arouses so much opposition, serves to show what an
accumulation there is in all of us of unnecessary desires.

Instead of quoting Fr. Lacouture or Fr. Hugo, Id like to quote Fr.
Zossima, that very much alive character in Dostoievsky's Brothers
Karamazov:

"The world says, you have desires, and so satisfy them, for you have the
same rights as the most rich and powerful. Don't be afraid of satisfying
them and even multiply your desires ... I knew one 'champion of freedom'
who told me himself that, when he was deprived of tobacco in prison, he
was so wretched at the privation that he almost went and betrayed his
cause for the sake of getting tobacco again! And such a man says, 'I am
fighting for the cause of humanity.'

"How can such a one fight, what is he fit for? He is capable perhaps of
some action quickly over, but he cannot hold out long. And it is no
wonder that the people instead of gaining freedom have sunk to slavery
and instead of serving the cause of brotherly love and the union of
humanity, have fallen on the contrary, into dissension and isolation.

"The monastic way is very different. Obedience, fasting and prayer are
laughed at, yet only through them lies the way to real, true freedom."

I have always meant to go through the New Testament to see how many
times food is mentioned, how many times Christ dined, supped, picnicked
with His disciples. He healed St. Peter's mother-in-law and she rose to
serve them. He brought the little girl back to life and said, "Give her
to eat." He broiled fish on the seashore for His apostles. Could it
possibly be that Mary was less solicitous for the happiness and comfort
and refreshment of others?

It is a part of woman's life to be preoccupied with food. She nurses her
child, she has nourished him for nine long months in her womb; it is
her grief if her breasts fail her; she weeps if her child refuses to
eat. Her work, as food provider is her pleasure and her pain, pain
because of the monotony and because right now the cost of food has gone
up one-hundred percent.

There are many ways to write about the problem of food.

The heretical attitude of mind which feels shame of the body, disgust at
its functions, distaste at supplying its necessities, fear of its joys,
has resulted in a most exaggerated attention to food. First we neglect
it because we think of eating as a gross pleasure. Then we lose interest
in preparing food for the family, then we turn to store and factory
foods with all their talk of vitamins and calories.

From the standpoint of health, there are two good books which stimulate
many thoughts on food. Dr. Price's *Nutrition and Physical
Degeneration,* and Alexis Carel's *Man the Unknown.* We eat to have
strength in order to serve God. If there are pleasures of taste to oil
the heavy labor of production, we should take them gratefully from the
good God. I'm sure the Blessed Mother did not neglect her family duties.
I am sure St. Joseph provided a good piece of wood which Mary kept
scrubbed and perhaps waxed, and she who "with her bosom's milk didst
feed her own Creator, Lord most high," must have seen to it that
suitable meals were served on that board to Him who was "like unto us in
all things save only sin."

I have been getting an idea as to what was eaten in those days by what
is eaten now by people in the same region. Reviewing a book for the
Commonweal, *In the Footsteps of Moses,* led me to T. E. Lawrence, and
then to Doughty's *Arabia Deserta.* At the same time I was reading
Bazin's *Life of Fr. Charles de Foucauld.* And, of course, The Desert
Fathers.

Wheat, butter and honey, dates, wine and oil, mutton, calves, fish and
quail--these are all mentioned in the Bible. Aside from feasts there was
a monotony of diet that we should get back to for the sake of
simplifying our lives, for the sake of being more truly poor with Him,
for the sake of fasting, and for the sake of health. A handful of ground
wheat with honey and milk on it makes a most delightful collation. A
slice of whole wheat bread makes a fast day breakfast. You can buy a
sack of wheat, a hundred pounds. You can live this way in city or
country. This is Lent, and Lent is a wonderful time to begin again.

Back in May, 1741, Pope Benedict XIV said: "If this observance of Lent
comes to be relaxed it is to the detriment of God's glory, to the
dishonor of the Catholic religion, and to the peril of souls; nor can it
be doubted that such negligence will become a source of misfortune to
nations, of disaster in public affairs, and of adversity to
individuals."

As in the days of the Old Testament, that prophecy of Pope Benedict XIV
has come true with us.

February 16

Still no baby! When a mother nurses her children and conceives while
nursing, there is no way of telling the date of the new arrival. It was
usually thought that a nursing mother did not conceive, but we know
several who do, most regularly, so they do not know whether the next is
due January, February or March. Nor can the doctors tell! When my child
was born I could be pretty accurate as to the date, but the doctor
informed me I was two month's pregnant when I knew I was five. Another
young woman I knew in the twenties kept going to the doctor for seven
months being treated for anemia, but by that time it was obvious she was
pregnant. Some women show their pregnancy most obviously, others so
little that one often reads of young women giving birth to babies when
no one expected it. One of the strangest cases I ever heard of was of a
young woman working in Margaret Sanger's birth control headquarters
(planned parenthood, they call it now) who confessed one day, to the
girl at the desk next to her, that she was going to have a baby that
very day! There was a great hullaballoo in the office.

Today is a great day even though no baby has arrived. A farm has been
bought. Three hundred dollars down payment has been made to Mr. Unger at
Stotler's Crossroads. The total price is twelve hundred dollars for
seventy acres of land that has not been farmed for twelve years,
although people rented there and lived there up to last summer.

There are seven rooms, and an attic for storage. There is a good tin
roof, good wood walls, badly papered, good hard wood floor; the doors
and windows are bad. The porch is falling down. The chimney is slightly
askew, there is a flood in the cellar under the living room. Water is to
be had from a spring five hundred feet away. There is a well by the
barn, long unused. There is a well by an abandoned school house next
door cemented over. The school house is also torn down. All the water
must be fetched. All the wood must be chopped.

Right now, though the new farm is only half a mile across the creek, we
must go ten miles around, up hill and down dale, because the creek is
high. People go around on horseback hereabouts; we are always passing
them, we, who have no horse, in a borrowed car. They carry saddle bags,
sometimes they ride side saddle, and look very ruminative, meditative,
as they ride along.

Last Saturday there was a high wind roaring around the house. There was
pouring rain that night and the night before, melting all the snow. Then
when the wind died there was everywhere the sound of rushing waters.

Sunday at 6:30 we were able to get to Mass (and by leaving before the
last gospel, we were able to get home in time for D. to go to the second
Mass at 9:00.) The pastor is ill in the hospital, so every Sunday a
different priest arrives. He talked last Sunday of the "Tribunal" of
penance -- a court where everyone was forgiven. What a strange court,
indeed, when over and over, repeating our offenses again and again, we
are forgiven; where everyone is forgiven! How different from *The
Trial* of Kafka, where men are tried, found guilty and sentenced.

Today and yesterday it was like spring outdoors. I got up and made the
fires as usual at seven, but by ten the children were on the porch
without their coats. T. and D. took a two mile walk Sunday. She washes
heavy clothes, today trousers and woolen underwear and shirts, yesterday
blankets, besides the ordinary baby wash. She bakes, she knits, she
crochets, she weaves, she pores over seed catalogues, she makes lists,
her face is placid, happy, calm; but her feet drag, she shuffles along,
and she feels heavy. She says it is a long wait.

We look at her and say, is it today? How do you feel? It is St.
Ignatius' Day, it is St. John Bosco, it is St. Martin--all good names.
It will be a girl T. says hopelessly, and D. shouts, "Don't you dare
come home with a girl. We bought a farm. We need a boy to farm it."
