% *On Pilgrimage* 
% Dorothy Day

July - August
---

*Summary: Relishes life on the land, saying it is a place to retreat to,
find God, and to go forth from as apostles. Summarizes five retreat
talks whose focus is to increase the desire for sanctity, to a more
complete love of God. Gives examples of her failure to love and the
struggle to renew love of God and neighbor. (DDLW \#482).*

August 1

JUNE AND JULY I have spent on the farm at Newburgh, where the retreats
have been going on apace. There was a study week in June with Father
Victor White and Father Pierre Conway, Dominicans, and then retreats
with Father Taggart, Vincentian, [and] Father Fiorentino [and] Monsignor
Betowski, both from the New York diocese; and Father Veale, Josephite.
One of the retreats was a family retreat, though we had not expected it
to be, but the long weekend of the Fourth of July was a temptation, and
there were four families, one with five, two with two, and one with one
child.

Hans had just finished laying the floor of the barn in time, puting up
the stairs and screening it in. Michael Kovalak helped as he always does
in a crisis, and Bob Campbell showed up in time to make the screens for
the windows and the doors. The great difficulty of the weekend lay in
the fact that a nest of swallows [was] shut in by the screen door, and
it had to be left open so that the mother swallow could fly in and out
with food. By the end of the weekend,  both mother and father bird were
teaching the young to fly. Now the screen door can be closed again.

Although the only family retreat was planned for Labor Day weekend, and
we are receiving reservations for that all the time, still another
family of six has asked to come for the mid-August retreat, and now
there is a mix-up as to whether we can have it on August 15th or whether
it must be changed to the 22nd.

This has been a month of much housekeeping, extra responsibilities sent
to us for care, extra people arriving we did not expect, including two
extra retreats not scheduled. Among the guests were Clara Faviano, Edith
Pietraniello, Anne Ricupero, and Frances Palmiotti, with their own
children and some others besides, making fourteen in all. They were
Celia Ricupero, Chickie Sclafani, Jimmy Deodato, Anthony Deodato, Cosmo
Ricupero, Anthony and Mary Ann Pietraniello, Nicholas and Morris
Palmiotti, and Frank Faviano, all from Mott Street. . . . They liked the
Newburgh farm so much that they thought it would be wonderful if some of
the neighbors would chip [in] together and buy an old inn which is for
sale down the road. We wish they would. We could practice mutual
hospitality, each taking the other's overflow, not to speak of enjoying
the wonderful Italian cooking. The girls made spaghetti while they were
on their Friday-to-Monday visit, and I was an appreciative guest, since
in addition to taking over the new barn dormitory, they used the canning
kitchen and cooked their own meals. They arrived the same weekend as
Monsignor Betowski and his retreat group, but Monsignor Betowski is well
used to the Catholic Worker and its friends, and joined them one evening
after conference for coffee and conversation.

"Your column will not be a pilgrimage this month," one of the men on the
farm says, "since you have not been off the place for two months
almost." I had begun to feel not only that life was like a "night spent
in an uncomfortable inn," as St. Teresa has it (and the weather has been
so very hot that the group of us who sleep up under the roof have felt
that our inn is indeed not what it should be in the way of comfort), but
I also had begun to feel like an innkeeper. And then suddenly, on a
moment's notice, I went to West Virginia for a five-day visit to my
daughter and her family.

Walter Vischer and I drove down in the Chevrolet, '32, and we started
off at dawn on a rainy, humid morning. Going through Montgomery and Port
Jervis and over through the mining section, running south of towns such
as Tamaquay and Pottsville, we hit the superhighway and traveled along
it at a smooth clip of thirty-five miles an hour (the car would not make
more) until we reached Fort Littleton, where we emerged, thirty miles or
so from Tamar and Dave's. We had no lights on the car and went through
four tunnels with fear and trembling. The first two seemed barely lit,
and we stayed in back of another car. We were off the highway by three
o'clock, and in another hour or so, traveling due south, we reached the
Rock Gap district south of Berkeley Springs, where Tamar and Dave have
their seventy-acre farm. Our only troubles had been two flat tires.
Tamar was out berrying, and during the few days I was there, we picked
blackberries and dewberries and ate berry shortcake and made jam. The
orchard had some early apples, and the babies, Rebecca and Susannah,
brought in pails of them, which we made into apple jelly, which with
goat's milk cheese goes most delightfully on whole-wheat bread. When we
were not doing up jams and jellies, we were down in the brook, which is
deep enough to swim in, and shallow enough, with a good sand bank, for
the children to play on, so it was a vacation indeed. I do not know of a
happier way to spend an afternoon than sitting in a shallow brook with
babies paddling happily around. There were little crawfish on the
bottom, little minnows darting between your fingers as you try to catch
them, boat flies on the surface, and beautiful blue dragonflies flying
just above the water. There were neither mosquitoes nor flies nor gnats.
The sun-warmed waters of the brook made up for all the "pail baths" we
had been taking through the heat. We washed the children's clothes
before we went back to the house, and we picked Indian pipes and
pennyroyal as we went back through the field.

Within a radius of a mile, there are four or five farms for rent either
for five or ten dollars a month. The houses can be lived in, and if one
owned them (the price range is from two to three thousand), repairs
could be done little by little. The ground is good bottomland. There are
streams for fishing, and there is hunting. There are pines and black
walnut and locust on the gentle hills, and there is pulpwood to be cut
for selling and plenty of wood for the fires in winter. Taxes are low,
and there are no gas or electric bills. But, and here is the rub, the
nearest town, of 1,500 inhabitants, is twelve miles away with its church
and schools and hospital. The larger towns of Martinsburgh and
Winchester are each about thirty miles away. But it's surprising how
much company one has, how neighborly people are. And the joy for the
children in such surroundings! But there is a price to pay for all this
beauty, and that price a willingness to accept the poverty of the people
on the land. Old houses, oil lamps, wood heat, water to be carried in
pails, the tattletale gray of clothes so washed, and the quiet, the
solitude of life with neither radio, newspaper, nor telephone, . . .
where the daily mail becomes the event of the day.

People are more afraid of such a life than they are of the atom bomb!
And so Peter talked of agronomic universities, farming communes, so that
people could go in groups, and in groups hold each other up. Man is not
made to live alone; he is a social being. So where there is a crowd,
they flock together. Peter used to say, "They are not communitarian;
they are gregarious."

Let us hope that Maryfarm at Newburgh will give a taste for the
simplicity of life on the land and the courage to face it, and that
other Maryfarms throughout the country will be performing the same
function. A place to make retreats, to learn to meditate, to think in
the heart, "to be quiet and see that I am God," a place to learn to
work, and a place to go from, as apostles, and make a life for the
family.

August 8

AN ACCOUNT of a day in my life, the first day of a retreat, spent in
silence and prayer. I am not the author of these retreat notes, since I
was taking down what I heard. Yet the priest who gave the retreat would
not claim them either. He would give credit to St. Paul, to St. Thomas
Aquinas, to St. John Chrysostom, St. John of the Cross, St. Francis de
Sales -- to any and all of the saints quoted. Or he would give credit to
Father Lacouture, S.J., or Father Pacifique Roy, S.S.J., or Father
John J. Hugo, secular. They all give the same retreat, having made it
with the first-named priest.

The cost of our retreats (there are four or five through the summer) is
what one can pay. If one is just able to pay fare, one pays nothing.
Maybe a poor visitor pays two dollars, maybe five, and then someone
comes along and pays a hundred, so as to include his poorer brothers.
These retreat priests believe in sowing what they have -- food, shelter,
spiritual wealth. The Lord has to take care of things. If we get down to
bread and water, well, then all the better [the] retreat. As it is, we
had very good meals three times a day -- so good, so enjoyable, that it
was a pleasure to fast on Friday to thank our Lord.

My notes are incomplete! I am just taking bits of them here and there
and using them. I had made the retreat many times before and had made
copious notes.

For inexactitude in quoting, for putting the emphasis here or there
(where I needed it, probably), please excuse me. I realize that it is
hard to print such fragments as this without doing a grave injustice to
those priests who give the conferences. But I do want just to give a
taste of my retreat, as though to say to others, "Come and see that the
Lord is sweet." Learn of Him and find rest for your souls.

Or as Isaiah wrote and St. John paraphrased, "All ye that have thirst of
desire, come to the waters, and all ye that have no silver of your own
will and desires, make haste; buy from Me and eat; come and buy from Me,
wine and milk [that is, spiritual sweetness and peace] without the
silver of your own will, and without giving me any labor in exchange for
it, as ye give for your desires. Wherefore do you give the silver of
your will for that which is not bread -- that is of the Divine Spirit --
and set the labor of your desires upon that which cannot satisfy you?
Come, harkening to Me, and ye shall eat the good ye desire, and your
soul shall delight itself in fatness."

For years, in houses of hospitality around the country, speaking and
writing and working, we have been trying to change the social order. Now
these last years I realize that I must go further, go deeper, and work
to make those means available for people to change themselves, so that
they can change the social order. In order to have a Christian social
order, we must first have Christians. Father Lallemant talks about how
dangerous active work is without a long preparation of prayer. Aldous
Huxley quotes him at length in *Gray Eminence*.

The desert fathers had these same ideas. When times became so bad (when
there was universal conscription, for instance), they retreated by the
tens of thousands to the desert wastes to pray, to work, and God knows
what the world would have been without them. St. Ephrem came out when
there was need and started a hospice during a pestilence and retired
again to pray.

First Conference

Christ is with us, though our eyes are blinded, just as He was with the
disciples at Emmaus. To keep the attitude of listening! The retreat will
be as successful as our silence. Silence of the whole being, all our
senses, all our powers. Keep only the power of loving. Control our eyes.
The eyes let in much noise, just as do the ears. We need solitude,
silence of mind. The mind definitely makes a noise. Stay in the company
of God. By not looking at others, as well as by not speaking to others,
we keep in solitude. Renew resolutions of silence every day.

Just before coming on this retreat, I was reading Newman's historical
essays on St. Basil and St. Gregory, their friendship, their
differences. St. Gregory made resolutions of silence very often, for all
of Lent, for instance. Newman admired this great discipline, "at his
age," too.

Our prayer should be, "Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth." We should
ask God to teach us the secrets of His love. Insist on this love with
importunity. No other love is happy unless it finds its roots in this.
Loving God seems to be loving nothing? But there is a definite way. We
must learn the rules. There is infinite happiness waiting. Also, it will
free us from the slavery of other loves. God is nothing else but love.
"Where love is, there God is." All other loves pale in comparison. Our
nature is not built for so strong a love, so we must change our nature.
"Enlarge thou my heart, that thou mayest enter in." How can you tell if
a person loves you? By their thoughts, words, and deeds. Our love is
made up of our actions. There is a conformity, a union of desires,
tastes, deeds. Many people want to and do make sacrifices, but there is
not much change in the temperature of their love for God. On this
retreat we study ourselves first. Our Adam life. Everyone has that. But
there is our Christ-life too. We are children of God. Grace is
participation in the life of God. Human life is natural to us.
Supernatural life is added unto us. We have new powers.

Second Conference

Good actions may be human or divine. There is confusion in regard to
these. The only actions which lead to God are divine actions.
Supernatural action has God for its end. The natural has ourselves.
Action has value according to whom the action is directed. The act of
eating, for instance. For our own pleasure, or to build our bodies to
strengthen them to serve God (I Cor. 8). There is such great waste in
our lives in just good actions. The whole burden of the retreat is to do
all actions for the love of God. Divine love is as different from human
love as human is from animal.

Our greatest danger is not our sins but our indifference. We must be in
love with God. It is not so much to change what we are doing, but our
intention, our motive. It is not sufficient that we refrain from
insulting a person; we must love. This retreat is to increase our love
for God. When we say that we love God with our whole heart, it means
whole. We must love only God. And that sets up the triangle -- God, the
soul, the world.

The wife wants the husband's whole love. Suppose a husband pays no
attention to his wife, and we say, "Well, he does not beat you, does he?
You should be satisfied that he does not kill you. What are you
complaining about?"

It is the same with God. He is not just content that we are not in a
state of mortal sin. Mortal sin is the sin of the Pharisee, putting
Christ to death in our hearts. Mortal sin, according to St. Thomas, is a
turning from God to creatures. We must do more than avoid mortal sin. We
must do more than just stay in a state of grace.

I remember some years ago Father Hugo saying that if a mother had an
imbecile child, and someone tried to comfort her by saying, "But he has
life," she would not find much comfort in that. She wants her child to
grow in mind and body. If we say, "But I can get away with this or that;
I can do so much and have so much, and still stay in a state of grace,"
our souls are like the mind of that imbecile child, with no development
and no growth.

The question comes to your mind, then: How can we love our husbands, our
children, our mothers?

All other loves I have must be a sample of the love of God. All the
world and everything in it must be samples of the love of God. We must
love the world intensely, but not for itself. We are human beings; we do
not cease to be human beings, but we are baptized human beings. At death
we are going to join God with the amount of love we have gathered for
Him. What we have when we die we will have for all eternity. "As the
tree falleth . . ."

Outside the chapel where we are having the conferences, the early
morning mist has lifted. The hot sun shines through the haze. The birds
sing; there is the hot sound of locusts in the trees.

Two people who are deeply in love are thinking of each other all the
time and what they can do for each other. So we must be with God. The
love of God is more intense than any human love. Keep asking for this
love.

Third Conference

Our heaven starts immediately on baptism. God is most generous in
increasing graces, in increasing this heaven within us. Supernatural
actions bring with them a reward, an increase. Natural actions bring a
natural reward and end at the grave. We must try to amass more and more
of God in our hearts. "Our hearts were made for Thee, O Lord, and find
no rest until they rest in Thee." We have such a capacity for happiness
that nothing here will satisfy it. "Enlarge Thou my heart, that Thou
mayest enter in." If we had not heard of God, if we had not been
baptized, we could go on looking for happiness here with no fault.

A farmer has a crab apple tree and engrafts a sweet apple tree on it. By
baptism we have engrafted the divine on our human tree. If other
branches break out, these take nourishment away from the engrafted tree.
The farmer keeps lopping them off. We are children of God because we
have His own divine life in us by grace. Grace life goes on into
eternity. The blood tie ends at the grave. We form part with God because
He has given us of His life. We must cultivate divine life, let it get
all the nourishment. "Whether you eat or whether you drink, do all for
the glory of God." This does not mean that we do not enjoy our spaghetti
for lunch. God gives us natural happiness too, in order to help us to
love Him. We do not give up spaghetti because we like it. We eat to
nourish, to serve God because we love Him.

There are good actions, supernatural and natural, divine and human.
There are bad actions -- sin. We turn from God, from good to evil, from
light to darkness, from heaven to hell. We are going to be saints in
heaven to the degree that we are on earth. Natural actions are imperfect
actions and lead to venial sin, which leads to mortal sin. So we are
separated from God. No one sins to offend God, but to gain pleasure.
Natural actions mean a slight turning from God. Sin and purely natural
actions show difference in degree. When we commit a mortal sin, it is
not a sudden thing. We started to move to that mortal sin a long time
ago. The more we go in for purely natural actions, the more we have the
tendency to sin. Fight mortal sin? Impossible. Fight venial sin? But
natural actions feed tendencies which lead to venial sin, which leads to
mortal sin.

An ad in the *New York Times* some time ago: "I took God into
partnership, and after that there were no stoppages, no strikes." How to
bring God into business and make it pay! All this and heaven too! Tom
Girdler, famous head of Republic Steel, endorses the book advertised in
this way. It was in the Republic Steel strike in Chicago in 1937 that
the Memorial Day massacre occurred, where twelve were shot dead and a
hundred wounded. Maybe it is since then that God is being taken into
partnership by the author of this book and by Mr. Girdler. The natural
motive: making the business pay. No wonder that religion is called the
opiate of the people.

The only way to get rid of sin is to get rid of the roots of sin. Going
to confession to get rid of the habit of mortal sin is like lopping off
the top of the rank weed. The roots remain. Fighting sin is like bailing
out a boat without bothering to stop up the leak.

What causes us to commit sin? Because we do not love God. It is not one
drop of cold water poured into the barrel of hot water that chills it,
but it is many drops. It isn't the one hundredth day of the fast which
causes a man to die of starvation, but the days of weakening. Every
purely natural motive weakens us.

The battle against mortal sin is a hopeless one. We must attack roots:
the natural motive. Then sin will be dried up. The Christian fights on
this plane always. Our whole attitude towards the world must be changed
(St. Paul). All things NEW  (II Cor. 5:17). Like being in love.

Fourth Conference

Why this pull in us? This double attraction? Before the Fall, all our
powers were obedient. Now they are in rebellion. They are off balance,
unruly, gotten out of hand. To lead a spiritual life we must bring back
that obedience. Bring back *pure* nature. Now it is weakened (Rom. 7).
The law is spiritual, but I am flesh, sold under original sin. For that
which I work, I understand not. For I do not that good which I will, but
the evil which I hate, that I do. There is a law of the flesh. All
people are essentially good. But there is that which is in them -- the
law of the members fighting the law of the mind, captivating them in the
law of sin against the law of the spirit. Unhappy man that I am -- who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of God by Jesus
Christ our Lord. It is by denying satisfaction to the flesh that we
strengthen the spirit (Rom. 8:13). Wisdom of the flesh is death. Our
Adam life and Christ life are like white and black threads all tangled.
Gradually and slowly we must take out of our lives all that is of self
(Gal. 5:16-17). There is a double attraction. Some lives are a turmoil
because people are strengthening both Adam life and the Christ life at
the same time.

When we were baptized, a seed was placed in us. It tries to grow into a
full-blown tree of holiness. Everyone is given that seed at baptism. It
is not too late to begin cultivating this seed [to] the degree of
sanctity God intends for us. The burden of the retreat is to uncover
that sanctity and let it grow, to start now. The only purpose for which
we were made was to become saints. What is to be done? How is it to be
done? Continue asking Mary that we be taught.

[It is half-past five, just past benediction. I am sitting by the little
statue of St. Anthony by the flowerbed. There are two large, fat robins
and three smaller ones. There are two woodpeckers bigger still, with
very long bills. There are three tiny birds so small the grass almost
hides them. A chipmunk runs across the grass, and a little rabbit,
scarcely bigger than the woodpecker, races across the lawn to stand
posed under the flowerbed. A typical St. Anthony scene.]

Fifth Conference

What did Christ say about this principle we have been talking about? He
condemns our use of the things of the world. All the things we can love
outside of God are three: the world[ly] goods, body goods, soul goods.
Goods of soul are friendship, love, honor, praise, glory. The goods of
world and body are obvious. Every action has an end, a means and a
result. He commends their use for God, He condemns their use for natural
motives. St. Luke says, *Blessed are you poor; woe to you who are
rich.* This is in regard to worldly goods.

Blessed are you who hunger now; woe to you who are filled (body goods).
Goods of soul: Blessed are you who weep; woe to you that now laugh.
Blessed shall you be when men shall hate you. Woe to you when men shall
bless you. The world is the opposite of Christ. (St. Luke is more the
ascetic than St. Matthew.) Love your enemies; do good to them that hate
you. They can only hate the natural. They cannot hate the grace in you.
If we practice these things, then people say we are crazy. Fine. We are
then fools for Christ. Then, perhaps, they will leave us alone. People
in love wish to be alone, anyway. So God lets these things happen so
that we can be alone. If anyone takes thy goods, ask them not again. If
you love them that love you -- sinners also do this. Do good, hoping for
nothing thereby.

There are so few saints because they will not act like this (Matt. 6).
Justice is good, but if we are rewarded by men, we have then received
our reward. The majority of Catholic lives are made up of good actions
for natural motives. *"I did this or that for them, and they did not say
thanks."* When this happens, be happy. God will give you thanks. If you
are disturbed, it shows the natural motive. So many good actions wasted.

[Outside the sun has set; the trees are breathing coolness. Such quiet.
Only the locusts again.]

Results? Are we to be as perfect as St. Francis, as St. John, as St.
Peter? No, we are expected to be perfect "as our heavenly Father is
perfect." Because God wants it. We must aim high because He says so. Lay
up [for] yourselves treasures in heaven. What do you think about all
day? Worldly things? There is your heart. Are you concerned about
health, bodily goods? There your heart is. If one falls in love, all the
habits of life are ruled by that love -- letters, telephone calls,
whatever we do.

Suppose, on getting married, a woman says, *"Are you sure you can supply
me with clothes, with food?"* We are in love with God; we will have what
we need. "Behold the birds of the air: they neither sow, nor reap, nor
gather into barns."

God is a sensitive lover. God will not force you to choose Him. It is an
insult to God to worry so about the things of the world.

Right now, today, as I sit here at this conference, the
five-hundred-dollar payment on the mortgage is due at Maryfarm. I
haven't the slightest idea how it has been gotten together and paid. For
I am sure that it has. If by any chance it is not paid, then that, too,
is His will. And we will all take it, whatever happens.

The conferences for the day are over. It is dusk, and a most delightful
coolness in the air. We have just finished singing the Salve Regina, and
it is almost time to prepare for bed.

Thank God there are such oases as these where one can gather strength
and fortitude for the combat, the strong conflict which goes on in one's
own soul.

It gets dark as I sit here, and the fireflies add wonderful effects to
the flowerbeds. The birds of the air, the flowers of the field -- was
ever Solomon in all his glory arrayed as one of these?

These notes are so brief, so abbreviated, jotted down so swiftly. After
I make a retreat like this, I carry them around in a little five-cent
notebook which can fit into my purse, and I read them over on the
subway, while waiting for a telephone message, a bus, or for the lunch
bell to ring. There are so many of those brief moments of waiting in our
lives. It is wonderful how sweet these notes are to the heart, though
often while one is taking them down they seem like commonplaces. But
when they are read over again, they have a distilled sweetness. It seems
to be God speaking.

One time I was traveling and far from home and lonely, and I awoke in
the night almost on the verge of weeping with a sense of futility, of
being unloved and unwanted. And suddenly the thought came to me of my
importance as a daughter of God, daughter of a King, and I felt a
sureness of God's love and at the same time a conviction that one of the
greatest injustices, if one can put it that way, which one can do to God
is to distrust His love, not realize His love. God so loved me that He
gave His only begotten son. "If a mother will forget her children, never
will I forget thee." Such tenderness. And with such complete ingratitude
we forget the Father and His love!

This morning between conferences I wept, partly for joy and partly for
the misery of life, partly at being so overwhelmed with demands made
upon me, and partly with fatigue and nerves. It is always a few days
before I really settle down in peace and quiet to a retreat. The first
day is a delight, but the second is hard. [By] the third I am well into
it and beginning to feel firm and sure of the way in which I shall go
the coming year.

My troubles are still with me for the first few days. For instance,
during the second conference, one of the "friends of the family" came
in, stood up in back for a while, sat down, got up again, sat down
again. Again at rosary the chapel was crowded, so he, together with
half-a-dozen others, had to kneel in the conference room. He chose a
huge overstuffed chair to kneel before and, bending over it, buried his
face in the depths of the upholstery. It was a heavy August day. These
little things would not bother me except that from that same person as
well as from a number of others there is a long history of years of such
behavior, appealing for attention, coming to bang on my door at
midnight, demanding attention, asking to be allowed to go to the farm,
demanding it, claiming that I, by the very things I write, must care for
them, support them. And the burden gets too heavy; there are too many of
them; my love is too small; I even feel with terror, "I have no love in
my heart; I have nothing to give them." And yet I have to pretend I
have.

But strange and wonderful, the make-believe becomes true. If you will to
love someone, you soon do. You will to love this cranky old man, and
someday you do. It depends on how hard you try.

My mother was not a Catholic, and how much she had been deprived of back
in the time of Henry VIII, when all the bishops but one went wrong! She
did not understand this idea of "willing to love"; she knew only
feeling. A friend of ours, a Catholic who had made a bad marriage, was
living what my mother considered a lie because she still acted as though
she respected and loved her husband, still treated him as though he were
the head of the house, her friend and companion. "How can she love him?"
my mother used to say impatiently. "And she should not act as if she
does!"

I used to try to explain that she was a Catholic wife -- that on
receiving the sacrament, they were "one flesh," and how could she hate
her own flesh?  She had promised to love and cherish him in sickness and
health, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, till death did
them part.

"It's a good thing something will release her," my mother would add
tartly, as though she did not see the point.

Such beautiful words, those of the marriage -- no one can bear to give
them up even if they do not believe them anymore. Of all the charges
made against the Communists these days of congressional investigations,
the charge of loose morals is seldom heard, so very loose have become
those of *Christian* people.

Recently I have been reading *The Meaning of Love* by Solovyov, and he
refuses to accept the idea, so universally accepted, that love is an
illusion, a lure, succumbed to so that the purpose of procreation is
fulfilled, and then vanishing. Father Farina, in his retreats at
Oakmont, used to emphasize the stages love must pass through -- all
love, whether love of friend, spouse, child, work, or a book one is
writing: infatuation, indifference, repugnance, irritation, even hatred
itself. I cannot remember the exact order, but all loves, even the love
of God, must be purified by being tested, by going through the Garden of
Gethsemane, through the Passion, and at whatever stage we stop, we must
start again, go over it again, go through it, or rather meet the same
situations and perhaps next time with greater courage.

I say I have no love to give, and yet I have to pretend I have. There is
a woefully crippled young man who comes into the office, always clean
and dapper, well spoiled by his mother and sisters. He is given
everything that a small child is given: candy, cigarettes, movies,
chewing gum, and he is insatiable for all these things; but of course he
wants more. An uncle owns a farm, both the mother and the sisters work,
yet he wishes to live with us, live with us on *our* farm; and of course
there is no question of payment for board. No, are we not running a
hospice, a retreat house, on a farm? Are we not supposed to be taking
care of the poor? And is he not one of the poor? Poor in spiritual and
mental and physical resources, it is true. So why do I worry about
"being taken advantage of"? That is the attitude of the world, of those
who give to us to give to others. "You are contributing to people's
delinquency. You are taking care of those who do not need to be taken
care of. We will not help you any longer to take care of such as he."

Of course I can go and ask his mother to pay something towards his
board. If he were living at home, it would cost her to feed him. If she
refuses to pay, to make a contribution, am I still to refuse him, when
we have such richness -- Holy Mass every morning, a priest living with
us, a way of life and instruction? We talk about our poverty, and we are
indeed poor in money, but we have a house, a farm, a library, music,
comfortable, clean beds, health of mind and body, and also a capacity to
enjoy. Of course we share these things. The farm has come to us both in
contributions and in our own hard work. The men work from morning until
night with no pay. They ask with humility, not as of their right, for
such things as underwear, shoes, tobacco to roll their cigarettes. They
are working men who originally came to us for help, and they stayed to
help us, year after year, serving a Cause, doing carpentering,
plumbing, electrical work, farming, and cooking. And are they to work
for such as this whining, spoiled cripple? they ask. His very crippled
state should make him an object of our pity and our love. Mental cases,
mental illness, and physical illnesses, as well as poverty, are calls
upon our compassion, because we must see Christ in them, but it is so
hard to see Christ in anyone who is whining, resentful, self-indulgent,
demanding, hating! "The venom of asps is under their lips." I have often
thought of this verse from the psalms. And how to love these, how to see
Christ in them!

There are two women at this moment, as there have been many more through
the year, who accept for months our ministrations, our help and
lovingkindness, only to turn and rend us. Lies, scandal, accusations
roll from their lips in a torrent and a flood of poison.

Last week a woman came in with a policeman. She was a very difficult
alcoholic whom Irene, who has charge of the women's house, had tried to
help for the past six months. Over and over again she had cleaned Ann
up, had tried to get her on her feet, had helped her to jobs, had
forgiven her seventy times seven rather than put her out on the streets.
The last time she was drunk, she had lost ten dollars in the house and
we found it. Tom has charge of the money of the house, and it was turned
over to him and used for "flop money" for others, for beans for the
soup, or whatnot. When she next came in, sober, with a job, and asked
for her money, we told her that we had found it but used it. We live
often from day to day, so there was nothing at that moment in the house
to give her. We did not say that she owed us far more for her six
months' stay with us. And now here she was, coming in threateningly with
a policeman, demanding we give her the ten dollars.

"Give her your cloak, too," Bob said.

How to love! How to turn the other cheek, how to give your cloak and
your trousers and your shoes, and then when you are left naked, you are
beaten and reviled besides.

"You never get a lick amiss," my mother used to say wisely, and I
suppose it is true. But sometimes the blows come too thick and heavy.
From morning till night they seem to be descending. Just before the
retreat, another woman, mother of a small child who had been with us
several years, pulled a terrible scene, drew a knife on one of our
Italian neighbors, and there was screaming, hair-pulling, one woman
. . . stripped half-naked. A mob of the neighbors gathered, the police
came, and the riot not only happened once but was repeated again during
the day. And with the neighbors standing guard so that the woman did not
return, the end of the day saw us with one less woman in the hospice,
the woman . . . evicted who had long been troubling us, abusing us,
stealing from us, even inflicting violence upon us in her rages.

There was a sense of relief that she was gone, that she had met her
match, that a difficult situation had been handled, but not by us --
that she had been gotten rid of. But where has she gone? She is one of
our many failures.

The same at the farm. A young prostitute with amnesia, so she told the
police, had been picked up at four in the morning, wandering in the
streets of a small town along the Hudson. She was kept in the hospital
for two weeks, and then a priest and a welfare worker tried to find a
place for her. None would take her. The House of the Good Shepherd
refused unless the court would commit her. The court refused to commit
her. No convent, no hospital, no charitable family in the parish would
have her. (And one could scarcely wonder, since she would seduce any man
she came in contact with, if she had her way, and she had a different
tale each day of the week in her bid for sympathy.)

So she was brought to us, though over our protests. She came in drunk,
early hours in the morning. She begged and stole from our visitors. She
lied and got much sympathy. She was taken to a job by the welfare worker
and ran away from that, and now we do not know where she is. Another one
of our failures. She was kicked around until she got lost. That is
probably the history of her life, or perhaps I am overly pitiful, overly
compassionate. I cannot get over the feeling that if we loved enough, if
we were patient enough, if we were saintly enough, if we prayed enough,
we would move hearts, effect conversions, and would save the lost, in
other words.

Failures. It is these things that overwhelm one. Physical sickness like
epilepsy, senility, insanity, drug cases, alcoholics; and just the
plain, ordinary poor who can't get along, can't find a place to live,
who need clothes, shelter, food, jobs, care, and most of all love --
these are the daily encounters.

So it is wonderful that this retreat comes in the middle of summer, when
one can stop and think in his heart about these things. I have made this
retreat eight times, and always there is something new, always there is
something to learn about how to progress in the love of God and one's
neighbor. How can we ever give up thinking and longing for love, talking
of it, preparing ourselves for it, reading of it, studying about it? It
is really a great faith in love that never dies. We hope against hope,
as Abraham did in the promise, and we know with something that bears
witness in us that this love is true, and that the promise is there.

I am speaking of heavenly things, but heaven and earth are linked
together as the body and soul are linked together. We begin to live
again each morning.  We rise from the dead, the sun rises, spring comes
around -- there is always that cycle of birth and growth and death, and
then resurrection. And the great study of how truly to become the sons
of God, to be made like God, to participate in the life of God -- this
is the study of the retreat. It is a painful study, and one can make it
over and over again, and always we need to straighten our course, adjust
ourselves to this upside-down way of looking at things, which is the
Christian way and which seems so often to be not common sense, not
natural. It is breathing rarefied air; one must get used to this air of
the mountains, so clear, cold, sharp, and fresh. It is like wine, and we
have prayed to Mary and said, "We have no wine," and she has given us
wine, the body and blood of her Son, the life of her Son, the love of
her Son.

About these two books which I have come across recently, *The Mind and
Heart of Love* by Father D'Arcy, the English Jesuit, and *The Meaning of
Love* by Vladimir Solovyov, the Russian theologian of the last century,
called the systematizer of Dostoyevsky's thought. I have always found
Dostoyevsky's message for me was love and compassion, so I was much
interested in this book, *The Meaning of Love*.

My whole life so far, my whole experience has been that our failure has
been not to love enough. This conviction brought me to a rejection of
the radical movement after my early membership in the Socialist Party,
the Industrial Workers of the World, and the Communist affiliates I
worked with. "Youth demands the heroic," as Claudel said, so the work of
these militant minorities had appealed to me. One could not read such
books as Sinclair's *The Jungle* and not want to do something, join with
someone to do something about it. And who else was doing anything?
Employers, landlords, political bosses, all professed Christians, were
corrupt and rotten to the core, I felt. What was there to love in them?
Certainly it seemed madness to think of reforming them, converting them.
Such an Augean stable was beyond cleaning up; it needed flushing out. So
I reasoned. Youth certainly is always looking for a "strong conflict."

It was not that I was ever disillusioned. My conviction that there was a
work to be done never wavered. Things did not need to be as bad as they
were. There was a possibility of change.

Certainly, too, there was always an inward conviction that we were but
dust. Alone by ourselves, we could do nothing. Probably all my early
religiousness as a child was still with me, and that religiousness
included a conviction of sin, of the depravity that was in us all. The
argument of conscience was always there. I was "bad" or I was "good." I
was bad when I hated and quarreled with my brothers and sisters, when I
stole from a neighbor's garden, when I was impure (and I felt that "dark
fascination" of sex, of the physical forces in my own body, very early).

This reminds me of St. Augustine's *Confessions* and his story of
childhood wickedness, stealing for the sake of stealing, deliberately
giving way to evil, to the dark forces within one. *The Turn of the
Screw* is a story of childish evil. Jesus Christ knew what was in man. I
was not baptized until I was twelve, but I had a conscience. I knew what
was in man too. But I had too a tremendous faith in man as a temple of
the Holy Ghost, in man made [in] the image and likeness of God, a little
less than the angels. Truly I did not want to know good and evil. I
wanted to know, to believe only the good. I wanted to believe that man
could right wrongs, could tilt the lance, could love and espouse the
cause of his brother because "an injury to one was an injury to all." I
never liked the appeal to enlightened self-interest. I wanted to love my
fellows; I loved the poor with compassion. I could not be happy unless I
shared poverty, lived as they did, suffered as they did.

Well, now at fifty, I cannot say that I have been disillusioned. But I
cannot say either that I yet share the poverty and the suffering of the
poor. No matter how much I may live in a slum, I can never be poor as
the mother of three, six, ten children is poor (or rich either). I can
never give up enough. I have always to struggle against self. I am not
disillusioned with myself either. I know my talents and abilities as
well as failures. But I have done woefully little. I am fifty, and more
than half of my adult life is past. Who knows how much time is left
after fifty? Newman says the tragedy is never to have begun.

I have been disillusioned, however, this long, long time in the means
used by *any* but the saints to live in this world God has made for us.
The use of force, the use of diplomacy in foreign affairs, the use of
anything but the weapons of the spirit seems to me madness. Especially
now since the atom bomb. This means the weapons used by either Communist
or Christian, who today seem to me in both political [and] economic life
to be Marxist also. The Communist believes in force, in espionage; so do
the press and the pulpit of the Christian churches.

The Communist does not believe in God; he does not see Christ in his
neighbor. Nor do we in the poor, the lame, the halt, the blind, the
prodigal, the sinner, the harlot; nor in those of another race -- the
Filipino, the Japanese, the Chinese, the Mexican, the Negro. (It is only
*atheistic* communism that is condemned by the Pope, we should remember.)

We too have done away with property, the land, the ownership of small
shop and business, with our monopolies and trusts, chain stores, hotels,
gas stations, everything on a colossal scale, wiping out the dignity of
man, who has hands and needs to use them, who has a body and needs
shelter, food, and clothing, who needs to live in dignity with his
children and enjoy the abundant life.

What should really set us apart from all other men is our love. "See how
they love one another." In the Bible which is still, after all, the Book
for all who have faith, the relationship between God and man is
described as that between animal and master (the Good Shepherd), between
servant and lord, between child and father, and between husband and
wife. Right now, by our baptism we have been made sons of God. But who
does not aspire to the joys of marriage, that love which makes all
things new? Who does not long to dissolve and be with Christ? The
pleasures of the beatific union are described as those of a wedding
banquet or an embrace. "He will overshadow me with his shoulders." "He
will kiss me with the kisses of his mouth."

And strange and wonderful to think of, we should have something like
this love for all creatures -- for mate, for friend, for child, for
enemy too -- the kind of love that makes all things new. For God first.
"My heart and my flesh cry out for the living God." The love of the
will, the memory, the understanding, and the love of the flesh. The
tenderness of a mother for her child, the physical love and joy she
feels in caressing it, contemplating it, nourishing it at the "breasts
of her tenderness." "If a mother forgets her child, never will I forget
you, O Jerusalem." "If a son ask of his father bread, will he give him a
stone?"

How much there is to learn of love, that feeling of the body and soul,
that teaches us what God is, that He is love.

I suppose one reason why people know so little of love is that the
attitude has been that love is implanted in the human breast to
facilitate the job of bringing children into the world and bringing them
up.

"What a terrible force this is," I said to my daughter once, "this love
of children, of grandchildren. And it is just as strong for the
grandchildren as for the children." I had thought that such joys were
finished for me. And such pains too, since all love means suffering, the
sufferings of parting, separation, and loss; and of course the suffering
because all relationships are not as they ought to be -- we never can
get enough of the other person. You love your own so much that you want
to be one with them, live their life, be inside their skins, as it were.

My daughter answered me that the instinct, the love *had* to be strong,
so great was the struggle sometimes, what with illness or
refractoriness.

So many mothers run away from their children or put them in nurseries or
go out to work because they can't stand the "pruning," the cutting, the
suffering that such love entails. The more exuberant the growth, the
more vigorous the cutting. And yet of course we should love all other
children with something of this love, this aching longing to cherish and
protect and save them from physical and moral dangers.

"Love can die," people say about marital love. "It is sentimental to
think of it as enduring. Once the work of procreation is done, the
glamour, the freshness, the alluring charm of love is gone. It is an
illusion."

People want the ending "happy forever after." They desire it as they
desire God, but they will not journey like Pilgrim towards it. They are
children and will not grow.

There is much to be thought and studied about love. The marriage act,
for instance, as a sacrament for the mutual sanctifying of husband and
wife. It is not the promises that make the marriage. The vows are
exchanged at the altar; the marriage is the embrace itself. "I've heard
it called many things," a seaman said to me once, "but not a sacrament."

For a husband to withdraw from his wife or a wife from her husband on
the ground that they wish to be detached is false piety. Such a
withdrawal should be by mutual consent, for the sake of seeking a still
higher path. The marriage act is a sacrament. It is also a "debt" which
each party owes the other, St. Paul says. Love is an exchange of gifts,
St. Ignatius said. To fast, to abstain from the marriage embrace (by
mutual consent) is certainly for the health of that love too, just as
fasting from food can be for the health of the body. It is a way to
increase it also.

