% *On Pilgrimage* 
% Dorothy Day

December
---

*Summary: Meditation on the spiritual weapons of voluntary poverty and
manual labor. Lists work to be avoided and personal practices of
nonparticipation while exploitation in labor continues. Calls for
decentralized living. Recommends growing in acceptance of God's
providence and seeing good in others. Reflects on silence during Advent,
a time of waiting and a time to examine one's conscience, a time "to
see only what is loveable." (DDLW \#486).*

FOR THE LAST month I have meditated on the use of spiritual weapons. In
Father John J. Hugo's pamphlet "Weapons of the Spirit," he advocates as
weapons devotion to the Sacred Heart and the Rosary. The love of the
humanity of our Lord is the love of our brother. The only way we have to
show our love for God is by the love we have for our brother. "Inasmuch
as you have done it unto one of the least of these My brethren, you have
done it unto Me." "You love God as much as the one you love the least."

Love of brother means voluntary poverty, stripping one's self, putting
off the old man, denying one's self, etc. It also means nonparticipation
in those comforts and luxuries which have been manufactured by the
exploitation of others. While our brothers suffer, we must compassionate
them, suffer with them. While our brothers suffer from lack of
necessities, we will refuse to enjoy comforts. These resolutions, no
matter how hard they are to live up to, no matter how often we fail and
have to begin over again, are part of the vision and the long-range view
which Peter Maurin has been trying to give us these past years. These
ideas are expressed in the writings of Eric Gill. And we must keep this
vision in mind, recognize the truth of it, the necessity for it, even
though we do not, cannot, live up to it. Like perfection. We are ordered
to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, and we aim at it, in
our intention, though in our execution we may fall short of the mark
over and over. St. Paul says, it is by little and by little that we
proceed.

If these jobs do not contribute to the common good, we pray God for the
grace to give them up. Have they to do with shelter, food, clothing?
Have they to do with the works of mercy? Father Tompkins of Nova Scotia
says that everyone should be able to place his job in the category of
the works of mercy.

This would exclude jobs in advertising, which only increases people's
useless desires. In insurance companies and banks, which are known to
exploit the poor of this country and of others. Banks and insurance
companies have taken over land and built huge collective farms, ranches,
plantations, of 30,000, 100,000 acres, and have dispossessed the poor
man. Loan and finance companies have further defrauded him. Movies [and]
radio have further enslaved him. So that he has no time nor thought to
give to his life, either of soul or body. Whatever has contributed to
his misery and degradation may be considered a bad job and not to be
worked at.

If we examine our conscience in this way, we would soon be driven into
manual labor, into humble work, and so would become more like our Lord
and our Blessed Mother.

Poverty means nonparticipation. It means what Peter calls regional
living. This means fasting from tea, coffee, cocoa, grapefruit,
pineapple, etc., from things not grown in the region in which one lives.
One day last winter we bought broccoli which had the label on it of a
corporation farm in Arizona or Texas, where we had seen men, women, and
children working at two o'clock in the morning with miners' lamps on
their foreheads, in order to avoid the terrible heat of the day, which
often reached 125 degrees. These were homeless migrants, of which there
are some million in the United States. Carey McWilliams' *Factories in
the Fields,*which you can get at any library, tells of the conditions of
these workers. For these there is "no room at the inn."

We ought not to eat food produced under such conditions. We ought not to
smoke, not only because it is a useless habit but also because tobacco
impoverishes the soil and pauperizes the farmer, and means women and
children working in the fields.

Poverty means having a bare minimum in the way of clothes and seeing to
it that these are made under decent working conditions, proper wages and
hours, etc. The union label tries to guarantee this. Considering the
conditions in woolen mills, it would be better to raise one's own sheep
and angora goats and rabbits, and spin and weave and make one's own
blankets and stockings and suits. Many groups are trying to do these
things throughout the country, both as a remedy for unemployment and for
more abundant living.

As for the dislocation in employment if everyone started to give up
their jobs? Well, decentralized living would take care of such a
situation. And when we look at the dirty streets and lots in our slums,
the unpainted buildings, the necessity of a nationwide housing project,
the tearing down that needs to be done (if we do not in the future wish
to have it done in the hard way and have them bombed down), then we can
see that there is plenty of employment for all in the line of providing
food, clothing, and shelter for our own country and for the world. We
should read Eric Gill, A. J. Penty, and Father Vincent McNabb on the
machine.

Poverty means not riding on rubber while horrible working conditions
prevail in the rubber industry. Read Vicki Baum's *Weeping Wood* and
André Gide's *Congo Journey.* Poverty means not riding on rails while bad
conditions exist in the coal mines and steel mills. Poverty means not
accepting that courteous bribe from the railroads, the clergy rate.
Railroads have been built on robbery and exploitation. There are
stagecoaches, of course, and we are only about a century past them. But
pilgrims used to walk, and so did the saints. They walked from one end
of Europe and Russia to the other. We need saints.

Father Meus, the Belgian who is a Chinese citizen since his missionary
life began in China, has walked thousands of miles. He said he would
dearly love to walk from one end of the United States to the other. Of
course, we are not all given the grace to do such things. But it is good
to call to mind the *vision.* It is true, indeed, that until we begin to
develop a few apostles along these lines, we will have no mass
conversions, no social justice, no peace. We need saints. God, give us
saints!

How far we all are from it! We do not even see our infirmities. Common
sense tells us, "Why live in a slum? It is actually cheaper to live in a
model housing project, have heat and hot water, a mauve or pink bath and
toilet, etc. We can manage better; we have more time to pray, to
meditate, study. We would have more money to give to the poor." Yes,
this is true according to the candlelight of common sense, but not
according to the flaming heat of the Sun of justice. Yes, we will have
more time with modern conveniences, but we will not have more love. "The
natural man does not perceive the things of the spirit." We need to be
fools for Christ. What if we do have to buy coal by the bucket instead
of by the ton? Let us squander money, be as lavish as God is with His
graces, as He is with His fruits of the earth.

Let us rejoice in poverty, because Christ was poor. Let us love to live
with the poor, because they are specially loved by Christ. Even the
lowest, most depraved -- we must see Christ in them and love them to
folly. When we suffer from dirt, lack of privacy, heat and cold, coarse
food, let us rejoice.

When we are weary of manual labor and think, "What foolishness to shovel
out ashes, build fires, when we can have steam heat! Why sew when it can
be better done on a machine? Why laboriously bake bread when we can buy
so cheaply?" Such thoughts have deprived us of good manual labor in our
city slums and have substituted shoddy store-bought goods, clothes, and
bread.

Poverty and manual labor -- they go together. They are weapons of the
spirit, and very practical ones, too. What would one think of a woman
who refused to wash her clothes because she had no washing machine, or
clean her house because she had no vacuum, or sew because she had no
machine? In spite of the usefulness of the machine, and we are not
denying it, there is still much to be done by hand. So much, one might
say, that it is useless to multiply our tasks, go in for work for work's
sake.

But we must believe in it for Christ's sake. We must believe in poverty
and manual labor for love of Christ and for love of the poor. It is not
true love if we do not know them, and we can only know them by living
with them, and if we love with knowledge we will love with faith, hope,
and charity.

On the one hand, there is the sadness of the world -- and on the other
hand, when I went to church today and the place was flooded with
sunshine, and it was a clear, cold day outside, . . . suddenly my heart
was so flooded with joy and thankfulness and so overwhelmed at the
beauty and the glory and the majesty of our God that I could only think
of St. Dionysius, "Concerning the Godhead":

It is the Cause and Origin and Being and Life of all creation. And It is
to them that fall away from It a Voice that doth recall them and a Power
by which they rise; and to them that have stumbled into a corruption of
the Divine Image within them, It is a Power of Renewal and Reform; and a
Sacred Grounding to them that feel the shock of unholy assault, and a
Security to them which stand; an upward Guidance to them that are being
drawn unto It, and a Principle of Illumination to them that are being
enlightened; a Principle of Perfection to them that are being perfected;
a Principle of Deity to them that are being deified; and of Simplicity
to them that are being brought into simplicity; and of Unity to them
that are being brought into unity.

The immanence of God in all things! "In Him we live and move and have
our being" (Acts 17:28). "He is not far from every one of us" (Acts
17:27).

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord. Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy
whole strength.

And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart. And
thou shalt tell them to thy children. And thou shalt meditate upon them
sitting in thy house, and walking on thy journey, sleeping and rising.
And thou shalt bind them as a sign on thy hand; and they shall be and
move [as frontlets] between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them in the
entry, and on the doors of thy house. (Deut. 6:4-9)

\*\*\*
===

The winter before Tamar was born, we lived in a little apartment on West
Street looking out over the Hudson River docks which was as sun-filled
as the chapel in which I meditated. And on the doors of that little
apartment, down the street from St. Christopher's Church, in an
apartment over a tavern, there were those holy words enclosed and tacked
upon the doorpost inside that house. I was strangely moved when it was
explained to me by a Russian Jew, a Communist, what it meant. I
understand one can find many an apartment in New York, and doubtless in
many of our cities with their large Jewish populations, with such small
metal containers, hanging unnoticed by the door frame. I feel like going
to one of the Hebrew stores on the East Side and purchasing one so that
hereafter, always, it may hang on the door of my house. We need these
reminders.

When the world is too much with us, how wonderful to think on these
things, to let the mind rest on these things, to rejoice in these words:
God is Light, Infinite Beauty, Goodness, "for there is no good save only
God."

One very dreary, dark morning a year ago, when the dark, cold mist hung
like a slime over the streets and tenements around Mott Street, I had
been at Mass down at Transfiguration Church, where there was a mission
going on. The priest gave a very good homily on the commandment "Thou
shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain." Each day he was
talking on the commandments, one by one.

In his talk he said that any murmuring against God could be included in
the violation of this commandment. He talked of "acceptance" of the will
of God in whatever the day brought forth. His talk emphasized the virtue
of abandonment to Divine Providence. He even brought in the weather.

And yet as I left the church and stopped to exchange some words with a
neighbor, my first words were "Miserable weather, isn't it?" I was
immediately conscious of my lapse and laughed at myself as I went down
the street.

But it is true that most of our complaining can be construed as
thoughtless complaining against God and His Providence. I remember
reading once in Romain Rolland that we Western people have lost the
beautiful quality of acceptance. Many writers on the East have talked of
the philosophical calm and "acceptance" of the Eastern, the Oriental, in
the face of heat and cold, disaster and suffering.

Cynically, our Westerner may say that is why they do nothing about
poverty and filth and disease. Many of our soldiers were disgusted
rather than pitiful at the poverty they saw everywhere, as though it
came of choice and sloth. I have heard them express themselves so in
regard to our own South. Certainly we Westerners have poverty, filth,
and disease side by side with our wealth and comfort. I do not think
much of that wealth and comfort, that shining civilization of gadgets
and electric lights and skyscrapers, radio and movies. There was the
ancient city of Ur out of which Abraham came. I like to turn my thoughts
back to Memphis, that great city of Egypt, and Babylon, whose walls
extended for forty miles in circumference. And there the Jews sat and
wept when they remembered Zion, Jerusalem the golden, so many times
razed to the ground.

"Praise the Lord, O my soul. Let all that is within me praise His holy
name."

No matter what happens, it is possible to praise, and it is impossible
to praise God without that swelling of joy within the breast.

And people! What about people -- the evil that men do? I think of Sister
Peter Claver and her saying that women's job is to love.

One summer Sister Peter Claver was rebuilding an old farmhouse over in
Jersey which was going to be used as a retreat house for Negroes. The
place was a wreck -- it had not been used for years -- and there was
work to do in roofing it, painting it, [and] repairing it, and Sister
had no money. She came to the Catholic Worker [house] and asked if
anyone wanted to work for God. She had to beg for every scrap of paint,
shingle, and lumber she put into it, getting what she needed week by
week.

Two of our men volunteered. Both of them were men who drank, one
steadily, the other periodically. John, who drank steadily, went out to
Jersey for the summer and never touched a drop for the months he was
there. Hugh went out and worked hard, but again and again was tempted
and fell. In addition to his other work, he carved a huge beam which
separated the sanctuary from the pews in the room they made into a
chapel, and he made a crucifix. He had learned these crafts at the
Catholic Worker house.

Sister never became discouraged in her loving charity. She loved these
men and brought out the best in them. I've been inclined to attribute
that loving warmth of Sister Peter Claver to the fact that she is
half-Jewish and half-Irish. It is in her nature to be warm and loving,
to see the good in others, I argue to myself. But true it is, she
forgives seventy times seven, she sees always the good in the other, she
sees a man as made in the image and likeness of God, a temple of the
Holy Ghost, the brother of Christ.

Oh, the joy there is in that warmth and love. Bernanos wrote, "Every
particle of Christ's divine charity is today more precious for your
security -- for your security, I say -- than all the specie in the
vaults of the American government."

\*\*\*
===

ADVENT IS a time of waiting, of expectation, of silence. Waiting for our
Lord to be born. A pregnant woman is so happy, so content. She lives in
such a garment of silence, and it is as though she were listening to
hear the stir of life within her. One always hears that stirring
compared to the rustling of a bird in the hand. But the intentness with
which one awaits such stirring is like nothing so much as a blanket of
silence.

Be still. Did I hear something?

Be still and see that I am God.

Zundel, in *Our Lady of Wisdom,* has some beautiful passages on silence:

Do we understand at last that action must be born in silence, and abide
in silence, and issue in silence, and that its power must be an
emanation and the radiation of silence, since its sole aim is to make
men capable of hearing the Word that silently reverberates in their
souls?

All speech and reasoning, all eloquence and science, all methods and all
psychologies, all slogans and suggestions are not worth a minute of
silence in which the soul, completely open, yields itself to the embrace
of the Spirit.

In solitude Christ speaks to the heart, as a modest lover who embraces
not His beloved before all the world.

In silence we hear so much that is beautiful. The other day I saw a
young mother who said, "The happiest hour of the day is that early
morning hour when I lie and listen to the baby practicing sounds and
words. She has such a gentle little voice."

St. James says, "If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect
man." And how much more women need this gift of silence. It is something
to be prayed for. Our Lady certainly had it. How little of her there is
in the Gospel, and yet all generations have called her blessed. [James
says,]

Behold, how small a fire, how great a forest it kindles. And the tongue
is a fire, the very world of iniquity. The tongue is placed among our
members, defiling the whole body, and setting on fire the course of our
life, being itself set on fire by hell. For every kind of beast and bird
and serpent and the rest is tamed and has been tamed by mankind. But the
tongue no man can tame -- it is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.

With it we bless God the Father; and with it we curse men, who have been
made after the likeness of God. [ James 3:5-9]

To love with understanding and without understanding. To love blindly,
and to folly. To see only what is lovable. To think only on these
things. To see the best in everyone around, their virtues rather than
their faults. To see Christ in them.

Many people think an examination of conscience is a morbid affair. Péguy
has some verses which Donald Gallagher read to me once in the St. Louis
House of Hospitality. (He and Cy Echele opened the house there.) They
were about examination of conscience. There is a place for it, he said,
at the beginning of the Mass. "I have sinned in thought, word, and deed,
through my fault, through my fault, through my most grievous fault." But
after you get done with it, don't go on brooding about it; don't keep
thinking of it. You wipe your feet at the door of the church as you go
in, and you do not keep contemplating your dirty feet.

Here is my examination at the beginning of Advent, at the beginning of a
new year. Lack of charity, criticism of superiors, of neighbors, of
friends and enemies. Idle talk, impatience, lack of self-control and
mortification towards self, and of love towards others. Pride and
presumption. (It is good to have visitors -- one's faults stand out in
the company of others.) Self-will, desire not to be corrected, to have
one's own way. The desire in turn to correct others, impatience in
thought and speech.

The remedy is recollection and silence. Meanness about giving time to
others and wasting it myself. Constant desire for comfort. First impulse
is always to make myself comfortable. If cold, to put on warmth; if hot,
to become cool; if hungry, to eat; and what one likes -- always the
first thought is of one's own comfort. It is hard for a woman to be
indifferent about little material things. She is a homemaker, a cook;
she likes to do material things. So let her do them *for others,* always.
Woman's job is to love. Enlarge Thou my heart, Lord, that Thou mayest
enter in.

And now, with all this talk of silence, I finish this long account of
the year. I send the book out with diffidence. It is the work of a
journalist who writes because it is her talent; it has been her means of
livelihood. And it is sent out with the hopes that it will *sell* so that
the printing bill will be paid, and enough [will be] left over to bring
out another book next year -- perhaps the book about Peter Maurin as
well as a book by another of the Catholic Worker editors. We write also
to help support the work which we are doing, because we have a very big
family, ranging in age from the infant twins at 115 Mott Street to an
eighty-four-year-old woman who wandered in from the streets. It is
written most personally because I am a woman who can write no other way.
If it is preaching and didactic in parts, it is because I am preaching
and teaching and encouraging myself on this narrow road we are treading.

"Life," said St. Teresa, "is but a night spent in an uncomfortable inn,
crowded together with other wayfarers."

There are bills to pay at an inn, of course, and they are one of the
reasons which led me to send this manuscript forth in the care of St.
Joseph, patron of all families. May God bless it, and you who read it.

