% On Pilgrimage - June 1970
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1970, 1, 2, 7.

*Summary: Empathizes with young activists who question their pacifism in
the face of so much injustice. Admires the work of activists in China,
Hong Kong, Central America, and the revolution in Cuba. Contrasts them
to the 20% of people who often ignore the 80% who face inhuman
conditions in the world. Tells of activists in prison and those getting
out. Keywords: Communism, family (DDLW \#501).*

Last night Michael Scahill spoke at our Friday night meeting, together
with Carol Hinchen and John Stanley. John had been to Cuba last year and
Mike and Carol have just returned from two months of cutting cane. Mike
has written about it for this issue of the paper.

A few weeks ago, David Miller who is out on parole from Lewisburg
Penitentiary after serving more than two years spoke to us and in the
course of his talk he said that he returned to the "world" neither a
pacifist nor a Catholic and wanted to discard labels. Someone in the
audience shouted out that he had indeed been "rehabilitated."

But in both of these two young men I can see only the deepest honesty,
and soul searching and recognition of the fact that we are not indeed,
any of us, Christian or pacifist, and they are indeed labels which we
have taken so much for granted and are quite content to wear them. To be
honest we certainly cannot say we are Christians. Being and becoming are
two different things. We might better say that unlike the **just** man
who falls seven times daily, we are falling seventy times seven times,
to follow in the footsteps of Christ. It is all very well for a St. Paul
who was struck blind with the grace he received on the way to Damascus
to talk about "not judging himself." But we belong to that 20 percent of
the world which possesses or uses, or has at its disposal 80 percent of
the world's goods. And of that 20 percent we are the whites, and we
should be able to see around us conditions analogous to those in Latin
America. We are the guilty ones and cannot help judging ourselves.

So it is good for us to be confronted with a David and a Michael and
recognize that we do not deserve, have not earned the title pacifist or
Christian.

Dom Helder Camara says, "The 20 percent who let the 80 percent stagnate
in a situation which is often subhuman--what right have they to allege
that Communism crushes the human person?"

Yes, Cuba is a Communist country and Dave Dellinger (whose nonviolence
is proverbial), and these young ones scarce past their twenty-first
birthday, return with enthusiasm, the deepest admiration for the
struggle which goes on in Cuba to build up an economy which will provide
for the common good. Of course what has happened there has been achieved
by revolution and is one of the most incredible stories in modern times.
Eighty five men setting out in a small ship, called the Gramma from
their exile in Mexico, all but wiped out in an initial assault on their
landing, and then the twelve survivors taking to the mountains and the
fields and winning over the peasants, the small farmers, the villagers
by the integrity of their personal conduct and finally marching into the
capital from which the dictator had fled. And now, after eleven years,
still struggling to build up by hard work and their austere life their
farming, their commerce, industry and achieve a deeply human life for
all. All this sounds impossibly idealistic but I visited Cuba in 1963
and it delights me that Mike and Carol have come back with the same deep
enthusiasm.

Peter Maurin used to quote from Chesterton, " It is not that
Christianity has failed. It has been tried and found too difficult."
Certainly the 20 percent of the world which is nominally Christian is
enough to damn Christianity in the sight of the 80 percent, Archbishop
Helder Camara tells the World Council of Churches.

The problem for the young is this. Shall they stand by and continue
talking of non-violence when they are able to accomplish so little in
the kind of program the Catholic Worker envisions, of education, round
table discussions, hospitality, farming communes, all to be accomplished
by voluntary poverty and manual labor? It means enormous self discipline
and we fail so continually that it is no wonder that many of the young
men coming out of prisons where they have witnessed massive injustices,
or coming back from Cuba where they have seen and participated in hard
labor and brotherhood, building for the common good--it is no wonder
that they begin to question whether they are truly pacifist, truly
non-violent.

Brad Lyttle a year ago questioned his own pacifism. David Miller coming
from Lewisburg penitentiary, Michael Scahill coming from Cuba, question
theirs. "When people have built up a good life, overthrowing tyranny can
they stand by and see it destroyed? Must they not defend it?"

These are hard questions indeed. I feel that these young men have grown
in honesty and seriousness. They have begun to see what study lies
ahead. We need to learn from

others, and from the struggles going on in India, Africa, China, Russia
and Cuba.

Decentralization
----------------

The Catholic Worker movement certainly has never been able to set up any
farming communes--merely houses of hospitality on the land. But we are
all interested in them. Decentralization is necessary for survival. The
greatest tribute I can pay to my friend Anna Louise Strong, the American
journalist who died recently in Peking, is to say that I will study
further the rise of the People's Communes which she wrote of in the
letters which she sent out these past ten years. It always made me happy
to see the postmark **Peking** on the news letters she sent out. The
mail service did indeed transcend all national barriers. (She tried to
get news for me of Bishop Lane of Maryknoll who has been imprisoned in
China for many years, but she did not succeed.) She died at the age of
eighty four.

Fr. Donald Hessler
------------------

A recent letter from Fr. Donald Hessler, Maryknoll priest, whom we have
known since he was a seminarian is most interesting and provocative of
thought. He is a "non-violent" priest. During the second world war he
was imprisoned in a concentration camp in Hong Kong for the duration and
when at the close of the war, the Japanese were imprisoned in the same
camp, he elected to stay with them. He has worked in the Orient and in
Latin America and while he was in Yucatan, some of the Catholic Workers
went to join him.For some time he has been in Mexico City and when I
visited there in the early sixties, he took me to a retreat being given
at one of the girls' academies which was most unusual in that he had
brought a number of young girls who came from a prison to share that
retreat. He has always felt that his work was to bring rich and poor
together, to break down those terrible barriers which exist between the
haves and the have nots. He has been interested for a long time in the
Christian Family movement because he feels that marital love can be a
purifying and liberating force that can break down barriers and
enmities. The extended family, the clan, the village, the commune, and
finally a community of communes to supplant the modern state--Martin
Buber has some such vision of community overturning the state in his
book--Paths in Utopia.

But let me quote Fr. Hessler. He has been traveling from Chile back to
Mexico and has stopped in nine cities: Vina del Mar, Quito, Guayaquil,
Medelin, Panama, Eraguas, Guatemala, Huchuctenango, staying one night in
the home of the middle class or rich family, and the next night in the
home of the destitute.

"The contrast between my first night and the others in each place was
between black and white, between sleeping peacefully alone and with new
brothers, between using a bathroom with a light, hot water, deodorant
and bath facilities to using a corner of the back yard without light,
water or even a seat. My wealthier friends kept in touch with me those
days and promised to keep in closer touch, got more deeply involved with
their worker brothers.

The Melvilles
-------------

"Finally 8 days in 4 dioceses of Guatemala left no doubt in my mind
about the much publicized case of the Frs. Melville, Bonpane, Sister
Miriam Peter and the students expelled from Guatemala and from
Maryknoll. No one can deny that they did nobly in going to the destitute
to fight at their side against rampant injustice, to give them voice and
power.

"Some Christian Family Movement couples, looking back, see that the big
mistake was their own. They, some of them parents of the involved
students--were blinded by their bourgeois mentality. They did not thirst
for justice like their sons and daughters, they did not join them in
their struggle to liberate the oppressed.

"Without them (middle class, educated nationals, including mature
married couples), the effort almost had to fail. Students, religious and
priests, alone cannot give a complete ecclesial witness--even less so
when the leadership is foreign. The national coordinating team of the
Christian Family Movement is re-examining the whole tragic-fortunate
case. Now with over a year to cool off, a serious effort is being made
to extract the gold--and there is plenty--hidden under the unhappy
circumstances so shouted about.

"Of course they know that if they don't, they can expect more and worse
happenings, because God is not pleased. Their state of 'sin' has not
changed: 3 percent of the population still control 80 percent of the
country's wealth. How is this possible? Because their military
dictatorship is backed up by millions of U.S. dollars, in guns and
munitions, used to silence the poor--in the name of law and order and
anti-communism."

Out of Prison
-------------

David Miller, Dan Kelly are both out of prison now but Jack Cook has
been refused parole. David Keubrick, just out of Springfield prison,
Missouri, is visiting us. He and Chuck Matthei plan to visit friends in
Vermont in the coming weeks. They plan to take the Appalachian Trail. In
prison, Woman's Federal Prison at Alderson, West Virginia, is Lolita le
Brun, the young Puerto Rican who was sentenced in the fifties to fifty
years, or perhaps it was more, for her part in the shooting into the
House of Representatives in a terroristic attempt to work for Puerto
Rican liberation. We have been corresponding for some years and I'm
hoping to get permission to visit her, though I was refused such
permission to visit prisoners at Lewisburg.

Lolita is a poet, the mother of two, one of whom, a boy, was drowned.
The daughter is now married, and I believe is living in Puerto Rico.
Lolita's faith has come to be the most important thing in her life.

Sister Rose Marie of Mt. De Chantal Academy of Wheeling, West Virginia,
wrote me recently:

"Three weeks ago we took a group of our Latin American girls to the
prison at Alderson. They had prepared a little program of Spanish songs
and dances for the Spanish speaking women who are there. Then altogether
we attended the Holy Sacrifice and sang the hymns in Spanish. It was
beautiful. I think we brought a little joy to these women and certainly
it did a world of good for our girls. I met Marjorie Melville. She is
such a fine person. It is consoling to know that Christ understands what
she was trying to do both in Guatemala and in the U.S. Women prisoners
have a special place in my prayers since I read about them in one of
your books."

Also in prison are Fr. Phil Berrigan and Tom Lewis, Dave Eberhart, Tom
Hogan, Tom Melville.

Parole has been granted to seven of the Milwaukee fourteen and they are
being released from prison in June. Mike Cullen, the head of Casa Maria,
the House of Hospitality in Milwaukee has just been sentenced to a year
and a day. Today one of our readers sent us fifty dollars to send to his
wife to buy books for him.

Fr. Dan Berrigan's account of the Catonsville Nine which is published by
the Beacon Press, Boston, Mass. 123 pages, \$1.95, is a moving and
dramatic account, and helps us understand their witness, though it is
not ours.

All of us here at The Catholic Worker have known the Berrigans for years
and many of their articles have appeared in The Catholic Worker. I am
hoping that they will get the CW while in prison so that they will know
of our love and our prayers.
