% On Pilgrimage: Russia, II
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October-November 1971, 3, 6.

*Summary: Continues her account of a visit to Russia. Recounts a visit
to Red Square, Lenin's tomb, the graves in the Kremlin wall, and
comments on Russian writers.  (DDLW \#515).*

I use the word Russia, because the three weeks tour which I enjoyed this
summer together with fifty-four others for "Promoting Enduring Peace"
was announced as covering Eastern Europe. That meant Warsaw, Leningrad,
Moscow; Sofia, Varna and Zlatni Pyassatzi in Bulgaria, and Budapest in
Hungary. Thanks to the radical labor movement, with which I was
associated for ten years in my late teens and twenties, I was acquainted
with people from these countries and with their literature to some
extent. So the trip was not just a sightseeing trip, but was rich in
associations for me.

I regret that I did not get to Archangel (a famous monastery there) or
Murmansk, both seaports in the Arctic Circle and familiar to me not only
from reading, but also from a seaman we knew.

I would have loved to take the Trans-Siberian Railway from Moscow to
Vladivostok, which Maurice Baring wrote about in one of his novels (but
I made the trip as I read Chekhov's letters, when he travelled by
carriage across Siberia to visit the prison island of Sakhalin).

I could not visit Zagorsk, the large monastery outside of Moscow, which
both Tolstoi and Dostoievsky visited. Was Fr. Zossima from Zagorsk? Did
Stravrogin confess to the monk there? Nor could I visit Tolstoi's home
at Tula, south of Moscow. There were restrictions as to travel. There is
a saying in Moscow embassies that there are two dictatorships and the
second is that of Intourist. But we were blessed by the kind of guides
we had, so gifted in knowledge of history and economics, as well as art,
literature and music.

Jim McGovern
------------

I was not the first of the Catholic Worker movement to visit Eastern
Europe. I suddenly remembered as I wrote of the Arctic Circle ports that
one of our dear departed friends during the first year of **The Catholic
Worker's** existence, was a seaman, James McGovern. He was first mate on
an oil tanker, a graduate of Marquette, who lost his faith and regained
it, found the CW on board ship in the Gulf of Mexico, and from then on
gave his salary to us to pay the printing bill. He walked with us on
picket lines between trips, and sent a wonderful story of a seamen's
club in a Russian port for the sixth issue of the CW. (He died during
the second World War when his ship was torpedoed off the Central
American coast.) The Soviet port he visited was on the Eastern shore of
the Black Sea, Novorossiysk. It is southeast of Rostov-on-Don, where my
nephew-in-law was working this summer, as he had done the summer before,
together with an international team of scientists on some experiments
relating to peace, not war.

Karl Meyer
----------

The other young man who visited Russia was Karl Meyer, who at present is
serving his sentence of a two-year term (and thousand dollar fine) at
Sandstone Federal Prison, for obstructing the income tax system by
refusal to pay taxes for war. He had made the San Francisco-to-Moscow
walk some years before, joining the march at Chicago. The walk ended at
Moscow University, where the students, though not agreeing with the
American visitors, demanded that the time of their talks be extended. He
also distributed leaflets in Red Square! It was a memorable visit and I
think the War Resisters at 339 Lafayette St., New York may still have
some mimeographed accounts of this adventure.

The hotel that our tour crowd stayed at was just around the corner from
Red Square and my guardian angel must have been on duty the evening we
arrived, because the room to which Nina Polcyn and I were assigned had a
bay window, which looked out on no less than four churches, with their
beautiful cupolas each of different design and coloring. It was a joy to
get up early in the morning to read the psalms, and sit in the bay
window (two comfortable chairs), and look out not only on the churches,
but the brisk cleaning job being done by half a dozen women sweepers,
who with long-handled brooms and long-handled dustpans whisked up any
scrap of paper, stubs of matches or stray leaves from the streets and
sidewalks. This has been remarked on many times before by visitors to
Moscow, and I think at First street we must give our visitors the same
opportunity to comment, by getting busy each day with the same job (when
we are not cooking meals, mailing out the papers or answering mail). It
would be a relief to get out and stretch and we'll have to start
collecting brooms right now. But we'll need shovels, not dustpans. The
other day a young student from Oxford took over the job at my urging,
gathering up armloads of trash from the gutters, the spill-off from
overflowing trash cans blown up and down the street. That one man
revolution of the do-it-yourself school, Ammon Hennacy, would approve.

In Red Square itself no traffic is allowed, only humans. My
aforementioned nephew, arriving the night before I was to leave Moscow,
had written ahead for me to meet him in Red Square at the left end of
the Lenin Museum, at seven o'clock in the evening. We had the evening
and the next morning together, and enjoyed visiting the Gum department
store, and riding on the famous Moscow subway, which is as cheerful,
clean, decorated and spacious as it is advertised to be. It is deep
underground, perhaps with air-raid shelters in mind, but dear God,
deliver us from another war! There can be no shelter from atomic and
nuclear war. There are eight million people in Moscow now and the subway
extends out in all directions like the spokes of a wheel. A trip on the
subway is part of every tour, but we took it on our own. There was of
course a river tour, and a trip to the opera and the ballet at the
famous Bolshoi theatre. We visited museums and churches which had become
museums, though there are many "working" churches in Moscow. Our Lady of
All Suffering, Our Lady of Tenderness--these are some of the titles of
Mary, Mother of God. Where a former church stood there is now a swimming
pool, heated winter and summer. Ivan the Terrible is called Ivan the
Awesome. There is a story that he blinded the architect after he had
built one palace or church so that he would not be able to design
another for any other monarch. But perhaps he is termed "Awesome," the
guide told us, because he repented of his sins and made many retreats
and turned to God before he died. The guide in Leningrad informed us
that St. Alexander Nevsky had been canonized by the Czar because of his
great military exploits. He was not a saint, she said, but a patriot and
a hero--which indicated to me that she knew what a saint was.

Everywhere there were flowers, like our own. Along the Kremlin wall, and
everywhere else little wild flowers also peeped out, chicory (blue
sailor), Queen Anne's lace, clover, golden glow. Tourists came from all
over the Soviet Union during this vacation time, dressed in their best
clothes, and eating ice cream cones. They were expensive but everyone
was enjoying them, and the stores were full of goods and full of
shoppers.

Lenin's Mausoleum
-----------------

It was not every day that the crowds gathered to visit Lenin's Tomb, but
they were lined up on the evening we arrived and on the day before we
left. The lines twisted like a snake, two deep, such long lines that
they extended blocks, and twisted all around the Kremlin wall. As a
foreign tour, we were supposed to be near the front, but even we were a
block or so away, and proceeded slowly. Before we reached the beginning
of Red Square, my folding chair was taken away from me and the American
Tour guide's brief case, both of which we retrieved easily later.
Everybody else seemed to know the rules--no bundles, no talking, no
casually loafing with hands in pockets. Dignity and seriousness were the
rule. Astronauts had visited the tomb before they set out on their
perilous journeys and returned to make thanksgiving on their return.
(The graves of the three astronauts who perished are covered with fresh
flowers, and the tragedy is still so recent that people weep as they
pass the new graves under the Kremlin wall.)

But first you go to the Mausoleum, a great square block--a most severe
contrast to the ebullience, the exuberance, the joy one might say, of
the intricately designed, colored and gilded St. Basil's cathedral,
which is outside the Kremlin but which dominates both Red Square and the
Kremlin. Napoleon, that godless one, had stabled his horses there and
wanted to tear it down; but the Soviet government today is constantly at
work restoring the beauty of all these shrines. Who knows what the
effect will be on the millions of school children who are guided through
these museums and "working" churches? "The world will be saved by
beauty," Prince Myschkin said in **The Idiot**.

There is indeed something awesome in Lenin's tomb. Entering the
mausoleum, you are blinded momentarily after being in the bright
sunlight, because inside the lighting is blue and dim. One walks down a
flight of stone stairs--a winding flight--into a dim crypt, dominated by
an uptilted coffin in which the head and face of Lenin are illuminated
by spotlight. On either side of this catafalque stands the guard, which
is changed every hour, a guard scarcely noticed in the gloom of the
surroundings. The lines move slowly, and regardless of the guard, I
stopped a moment to make the sign of the Cross and to say a prayer for
this man who brought so great an upheaval into the world. (To understand
more about the struggle the world is in right now, it is good to read
such personal accounts as the work of Lenin's widow, Nadeszda Krupskaya,
who shared his exiles and his later work; also the autobiography of Leon
Trotsky, whose name was linked with Lenin's until Stalin came into power
and the reign of terror began.)

Kremlin Wall
------------

How fragmentary such an account as this must be. But I must not omit our
walk along the Kremlin Wall, where I was moved to see the names of the
Americans, Ruthenberg and Bill Haywood, on the Kremlin Wall in Roman
letters, and the name of Jack Reed (with whom I worked on the old
**Masses**), in Cyrillac characters in a flower-covered grave, one of
many which were on the side of the brick walk we were traversing. I did
not see the grave of Madame Krupskaya, but Stalin's grave was behind the
Lenin Mausoleum, the last one of a long line of Soviet leaders whose
sculptured heads graced the graves, Stalin's grave showed no bust
marking his plot. For a while he had shared a place of honor by the side
of Lenin in the mausoleum, but his remains were moved in 1961. I felt
that my former roommate, at the University of Illinois, Rayna Prohme,
should have had a flower-bedecked grave along the Kermlin wall also. She
had edited a paper in Hankow, had accompanied Madame Sun Yat Sen to
Moscow when Chiang Kai Shek had taken over the Communist dominated city,
and was preparing to continue her work as a dedicated Communist when she
died in Moscow. Vincent Sheehan tells her story in his book **Personal
History**, in the chapter titled "Revolution."

I was interested to read on my return from Europe that Nikita Krushchev,
another downgraded leader of the Soviets, had been buried in what some
American newspapers termed an obscure cemetery outside of Moscow. But it
was really in the famous old cemetery in the grounds of the 400 year old
Novodevichye Monastery, which is just three miles from the Kremlin and
within sight of the famous Moscow University on Lenin Heights. He may
have been denied a state funeral, this man who released the prisoners
from the slave labor camps and was responsible for allowing Alexander
Solzhenitzyn to publish his first great book, **A Day in the Life of
Ivan Denisovich** in Nov Mir, the popular literary journal of Moscow.
But he is resting in the company of many Russian greats, such as
Soloviev, that philosopher of ecumenism, who so influenced Dostoievsky's
thinking. "Soloviev is the prophet of ecumenism, and indeed of
everything good in Russia," Helene Iswolsky told me, as I was writing
this.

Chekhov
-------

Anton Chekhov is also buried there, brought back from Yalta where he was
dying of tuberculosis. His wife was an actress in the Moscow Art Theater
and lived long after him. She continued to act in his great dramas, as
he wished to have them played, and when she died there were
demonstrations of grief by the people in Russia, who so loved her
husband's works.

I remember one of the things Chekhov wrote in a letter after visiting
the prison camp in Sakhalin Island. "God's world is good. It is only we
who are bad…One must work, and to hell with everything else. The
important thing is that we must be just and all the rest will come as
matter of course…My soul is in an upheaval."

Thomas Mann wrote an analysis of Chekhov's plays and his philosophy of
work many years ago in an article which appeared in **Masses and
Mainstream**. I loaned out this precious copy, and I never saw it again,
though I'd like much to get hold of it. I guess I shall have to read
over the plays myself and dig out those excellent quotations on work. Or
maybe the reader who has my copy will return it.

More Coming
-----------

It can well be seen that my interests on this trip were not so much
economic as religious. I am leaving out my account of Bulgaria and
Hungary until another issue of the CW. I would like also to recommend to
our readers a very clear account of our pilgrimage from the pens of Dr.
Jerome Davis and E. Raymond Wilson, the leaders of our tour, which
appeared in the October issue of **Quaker Life**.
