% On Pilgrimage - July/August 1973
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1973, 2, 7.

*Summary: "I must write about prayer because it is as necessary to life
as breathing." Enumerates several forms of prayer: reading as prayer,
the psalms, scriptural prayers of faith, hope and charity, and praying
for and to those who have died. (DDLW \#532).*

There are so many things I want to write about that the eight pages of
the **CW** could not contain them, so I keep notebooks and write down my
morning meditations which come to me, as distractions perhaps, during
the morning hour of prayer.

This morning it is cool after a week of grueling heat and humidity. I
have been in the city all summer, with usually a weekend on Staten
Island where there is still country and beach to refresh one.

My rear window looks out over a factory roof which occupies what used to
be two long back yards between Second and First Streets. It is a black
tarpapered roof, but miracle of miracles, about ten feet of green grass,
a foot high, has sprung up in some earth which somehow lodged in the
crack between this roof and the 12-story house which shuts off the
western sky. There is an ailanthus tree, a few years old, in our
ten-foot back yard, and another older one in another minuscule yard in
the rear of a Second St. house. The trees stay green all summer, but the
grass flourishes a few weeks, then turns yellow and dies. There is no
nourishment in the sparse dust and dirt between brick and cement.

There are three or four cats who stalk the few pigeons who clean up the
crumbs left from the food Paul puts out for them. He climbs a ladder to
the roof to do so. This is my glimpse of wildlife in the city.

St. Benedict's Day
------------------

I want to write about one day especially, the feast of St. Benedict,
July 11. I have to keep going back to my old St. Andrew's daily missal,
after using the revised missalette provided by our parish. I am tempted
to complain at the many changes taking placer in the Church's daily
routine, but, after all, one can keep one's old missal as an
encyclopedia, and look up those short, precious accounts of the saints
and the history of their times which the old St. Andrew's missal
contained. After all, the poor could not afford missals. Peter Maurin
told us to study the past, in order to live in the present so as to make
the future different. This type of reading is a form of prayer. The
Little St. Therese used to read the Scriptures constantly (in those days
she was permitted to read only part of the Old Testament, so we
Catholics can rejoice in the freedom we have now, even though we
recognize that freedom is dangerous, imposing terrible responsibilities
on us to try to live as we believe and profess). Often this reading the
Scriptures is like plodding through a desert, we get so little from it.
And then chapters, verses, shine out with a great light and our way is
made clear for us.

Yes, reading is prayer--it is searching for light on the terrible
problems of the day, at home and abroad, personal problems and national
problems, that bring us suffering of soul and mind and body.

And relief **always** comes. A way is always opened, "Seek and you shall
find."

There is nothing too small to pray about. "Oh God come to my assistance;
O Lord make haste to help me." Sometimes one is so tired, so dull, so
hopeless, that it is a great effort of the will to remember to pray even
so short a prayer. "Oh Lord hear my prayer. Let my cry come unto Thee."
I remember seeing a black man on a train in Oregon reading from a
pamphlet edition of the Psalms which he took out of his pocket. My heart
warmed to him as to a blood brother.

I must write about prayer because it is as necessary to life as
breathing. It is food and drink. And I must write about it because we
here at the Catholic Worker are surrounded by the lame, the halt and the
blind, the utterly destitute, and it is a seemingly hopeless situation.
And we can do so little. Yet young people, who come to us to give us a
few months or years of their lives, learn here what it is to love, to
hope, to rejoice.

And now we have a great call to rejoice.

On the feast of St. Benedict, whose motto was *Ora et Labora*, Pray and
Work, we received such an answer to our prayers, that renewed strength
has poured into us all. And such gratitude! Which is a grace, as the
root of the word reveals.

Not only have we found a house for the destitute women Anne Marie Fraser
and I have been writing about, but we have received assurances from the
sons of St. Benedict, at a not-too-distant monastery, that they will
sell some of their unused property and provide the money to pay for it!
I have been "calling on the Name of the Lord" in praise and joy and love
ever since.

There are always delays, of course. The house we hope will be ours will
have to go through extensive repairs to make it suitable. St. Joseph's
House on First Street taught us that eight years ago. There is little
chance of a "certificate of occupancy" from the city building department
until next year. Meanwhile, we can continue our "little way" and do what
we can. There is always food to comfort soul and body, and clothes, and
the few beds we can provide now for these most neglected poor. God bless
these monks.

Another Gift
------------

But there was still another gift--another "happening" on St. Benedict's
day--in the way of a visit from two cloistered nuns of a famous order.
One old, one young (and the older looked stronger physically than the
younger). They are looking for a little apartment on the lower East
Side, in St. Bridget's parish near us, where they can live as cloistered
nuns in silence and prayer and poverty. They have been inspired by the
work of the Little Sisters of Jesus, who, with the Little Brothers, are
followers of Charles de Foucauld, the hermit of the Sahara. There are
two Little Sisters in New York now, living in a Puerto Rican slum in
uptown Manhattan, and two Little Brothers a few blocks from us, just off
the Bowery.

This little Cloister will, God willing, be nearby, and soon, I hope.

When I went to 5:30 Mass that day, my heart full of gratitude to the
Holy Spirit, I told a young Jesuit scholastic about the nuns and begged
his help in finding a little apartment for them.

"It is a dangerous neighborhood" he said gravely. Yes, it is true. But
thank God, these women continue to wear their habits as the Little
Sisters of Jesus do, as Mother Teresa's Sisters do. To me, a "habit" is
a sacramental, "an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual
grace," a prayer in itself, a reminder of prayer.

Prayer
------

There has been a constant mention of prayer in this column this month
because prayer is an **exercise**, sometimes dull, sometimes boring, but
it brings health to the soul, which needs exercise just as the body
does.

May I suggest these three acts of faith, hope and charity, quotations
from Scripture which should strengthen us? "Lord, I believe, help Thou
my unbelief." "In Thee have I hoped, let me never be confounded." " Dear
Lord, take away my heart of stone and give a heart of flesh," so I may
learn to love, to grow in love.

I pray not only for those who have died, but **to** them also. In our
November issue, I hope to write about our own dear departed, and about
the lowliest and the highest among them. Right now, I am praying to
Jacques and Raissa Maritain, whose obituaries I will write belatedly,
though Stanley has already written one. I will pray to them to watch
over this new venture of a cloister in the East Village, as our Bowery
district is called. Since these nuns were inspired by Charles de
Foucauld and his Little Sisters and Brothers, and since Jacques himself
had joined their company some time before he died, they should be
powerful friends in Heaven.
