% On Pilgrimage - September 1973
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1973, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: Diary-like description of her participation in a United Farm
Workers' picket in California, her arrest, and several days in jail.
Discusses the work of Cesar Chaveza, Joan Baez, Daniel Ellsberg, and
others. Concludes with a prayer to Pope John to aid Chavez and other
rural workers throughout the United States. (DDLW \#533).*

**July 30.** We left Kennedy Airport at noon for San Francisco, Eileen Egan
and I. She was attending, as I too was supposed to, the 50^th^
Anniversary of the War Resister's International. Joan Baez had invited
me to be at her Institute for the Study of Non-violence for the week
with some members of Cesar Chavez' United Farm Workers' Union. When we
arrived in time for the Institute's Monday night pot luck supper in Palo
Alto, plans had changed because of the mass arrests of farm workers who
were defying an injunction against mass picketing in Kern County. There
was now a strike in the vineyards as well as in lettuce fields because
the growers would not renew their contracts with the farm workers and
were making new contracts with the Teamsters. The strike was widespread
and mass arrests were continuing. Cesar Chavez' union of Farm Workers
has everything that belongs to a new social order, so my path was clear.
I had come to picket where an injunction was prohibiting picketing, and
I would spend my weeks in California in jail, not at conferences.

This first evening was beautiful. Joan Baez sang all evening in the
patio of one of the houses belonging to a group interested in land
trusts, non-violence, and the farm strike.

Joan lives up in the hills somewhere near, has a "Christ room" where an
old ex-prisoner stays. Lee Swenson, who works with the Institute, drove
us to one of the houses where we slept well. We had arrived in
California at 2:30 p.m. California time, 5:30 N.Y. time and by N.Y. time
were probably in bed well after midnight. It was a long day.

**July 31**. A very hot drive down the valley to Delano today, arriving as
strike meeting ended. Today many Jesuits were arrested. Also sisters who
had been attending a conference in San Francisco. Mass in the evening at
Bakersfield, ended a tremendous demonstration, flag-carrying Mexicans --
singing, chanting, marching -- and when the Mass began there were so
many people that it was impossible to kneel, but there was utter
silence.

**August 1.** Up at 2 a.m., picketed all day, covering many vineyards.
Impressive lines of police, all armed--clubs and guns. We talked to
them, pleaded with them to lay down their guns and clubs. One was black.
His mouth twitched as he indicated that, No, he did not enjoy being
there. Two other police came and walked away with him. I told the other
police I would come back next day and read the Sermon on the Mount to
them. I was glad I had my folding chair-cane so I could rest
occasionally during picketing, and sit there before the police to talk
to them. I had seen a man that morning sitting at the entrance to
workers' shacks with a rifle across his knees. (Within two weeks, Juan
de la Cruz was shot in the chest by such a rifle.)

**August 2.** Slept at Sanger with nurses from one of the farm workers'
clinics. Up at 4 a.m., was at the park at Parlier before dawn. Cesar
came and spoke to us about the injunction and arrests (wonder when he
sleeps) and we set out in cars to picket the area where big and small
growers had united to get the injunction. When three white police buses
arrived some time later we were warned by the police thru the bull horns
that we were to disperse, and when we refused, were ushered into the
buses and brought to this "industrial farm" (which they do not like us
to call a jail or prison though we are under lock and key and our
barracks surrounded by riot fencing topped with barbed wire). Here we
are, 99 women strikers including 30 sisters, 50 men strikers including
two priests. This is a 640-acre farm and can accommodate 300. Now
greatly overcrowded. Fr. John Coffield and Bill Butler were my first
visitors. Fr. Coffield is an old and dear friend in the Los Angeles
diocese who has always rejoiced in tribulation, his own and that of
others. Bill is with the Los Angeles House of Hospitality, the Ammon
Hennacy House. Eileen is staying with Helen Perry, where I too stayed
before arrest. Helen is with the Grail. Had her with us in N.Y. and with
Eileen in Vietnam.

**August 3.** Maria Hernandez got ill in the night. Taken to Fresno
Hospital, cardiograph taken and she was put in the Fresno jail. (She was
returned to us still ill August 7. She worries about her children.)
Lidia Salazar has 3 at home, 11, 8 and 2. Her husband works at a trailer
camp. The 11-year old girl takes care of the house and children. I met
them, as I'm meeting many families, at visiting hours. Kathleen and Pat
Jordan, on a vacation West, visited today. Another Mexican mother in our
barracks has ten children and there certainly was a crowd visiting her.
Such happy, beautiful families â€“ it reminded me of a tribute paid to the
early Christians when they were imprisoned and the hordes of their
fellow Christians visited them and impressed their guards.

I must copy down the charges made against me. (We were listed in groups
of ten): "The said defendants, on or about August 2, were persons
remaining present at the place of a riot, rout, and unlawful assembly,
who did willfully and unlawfully fail, refuse and neglect after the same
had been lawfully warned to disperse."

Some other women listed in the criminal complaint in my group of ten
were Demetria Landavazo De Leon, Maria de Jesus Ochoa, Efigenia Garcia
de Rojas, Esperanza Alanis De Perales, etc. How I wish I could list them
all!

The second charge made against us was "refusal to disperse and being
assembled with two or more persons for the purpose of disturbing the
peace and committing an unlawful act."

Other visitors during our imprisonment, or "detainment," were Eugene
Nelson, I.W.W. editor of **The Industrial Worker** who was refused
admission because he came between visiting hours. Glenda, a "small
grower's" wife (they have 40 acres) who said small people were being
crushed between the big growers and corporations. Another 20-acre grower
said he was just beginning to make it when the strike came. Their visits
hurt of course, but they had no sympathy for the strikers, and strong
racist feelings.

During crucial meetings between Cesar Chavez and Teamsters the sisters
all signed up for a night of prayer, taking two-hour shifts all through
the night, and the Mexican women all knelt along the tables in the
center and prayed the rosary together. Barracks A, B, and E were alive
with prayer.

Tonight, a young Mexican legal assistant of the Union attempting to talk
to us was brutally and contemptuously ordered out. He looked like an El
Greco painting. There were only three incidents I could have complained
of--one other rudeness, and the attempt to search the bodies of the
prisoners for food smuggled in.

Two of the youngest pickets perpetrated a bit of mischief when a woman
guard attempted to search a striker. They dumped a paper bag of small
frogs at the feet of the guard. They were getting even, they said,
because she called them "dirty Mexicans." Today I had interesting
conversations with Jo von Gottfried, a teacher of rhetoric in Berkeley,
a great lover of St. Thomas and St. Augustine. I tried to understand
what "rhetoric" really means and she explained, but I cannot now
remember.

**August 8.** Today Joan Baez, her mother and Daniel Ellsberg visited us.
She sang to us and the other prisoners in the yard. There was a most
poignant prison song. Her voice, her complete control of it, is
remarkable. It tore at your heart. A dramatic song. She was singing when
other prisoners were being brought to the dining room, and she turned
her back to us and sang to all of them directly, as they stopped their
line to listen.

Daniel Ellsberg said Cesar Chavez, the thought of him, had given him
courage during his two-year ordeal in the courts.

**August 9.** I'm all mixed up in my dates. Dr. Evan Thomas came today, 91
and tall, lean, strong looking. God bless him. And Father Don Hessler
whom we've known since he was a seminarian at Maryknoll. He suffered
years of imprisonment under the Japanese in WW II. After years in
Yucatan and Mexico, he now is working in San Antonio with Bishop Flores.
He brought with him 4 sisters who belong to Las Hermanas, the national
organization of Spanish-speaking sisters. Gerry Sherry of the **San
Francisco Moniter** came for an interview. The Catholic Worker has known
him many years, in Atlanta, Fresno and San Francisco.

**August 11.** Good talks with Sister Felicia and with Sister Timothy of
Barracks B who are good spokeswomen for our groups. Two blacks
representing **Newsweek** called. They were interested in "the religious
slant" of the strike. Greg Howard, photographer, was from Princeton,
Thurman White from Stanford.

**August 12.** Union lawyers visiting us say we'll be free tomorrow. A
peaceful Sunday. Mass in the evening. Today the Mexican girls were
singing and clapping and teaching the sisters some Mexican dancing. They
reminded me of St. Teresa of Avila with her castanets at recreation.

All our praying seemed to bring about some results. Mr. Fitzsimmons,
president of Teamsters, canceled or disavowed the contracts signed by
another Teamster leader in Delano. He demoted or took some action on the
leader who signed them. We really know little. We do know the power of
prayer, however.

**August 13.** We packed our bags last night and a first bus load, me too,
left our farm labor camp this morning, reached the jail and were turned
back! Then we spent hours in the "rec" hall where a team of "public
defenders" whom we were supposed to have seen Sunday, sat around
(perhaps I saw **one** working) while Sister Felicia interviewed all the
women in our barracks for the rest of the day and filled out forms which
the judge required.

In the evening we finally all were again loaded in vans and brought to
Fresno where we, with a great crowd in the park in front of the
courthouse, celebrated Mass.

Jan, Chris and Joan were waiting to greet me from the St. Martin de
Porres House which is in San Francisco. Cesar Chavez welcomed us all and
Helen Chavez and three of her daughters, young and beautiful all of
them, were there. A meeting of strikers is scheduled for Friday, so I
have time to visit the San Francisco House for two days. (As I am
copying these notes from my diary here in the Los Angeles' Ammon Hennacy
House some one comes in bringing a newspaper, the **Times**, carrying
gigantic headlines, **Teamsters Give Up.**)

Strike Continues
----------------

It is August 21 as I write and my entry in my diary of August 12 is this
same news the **L.A. Times** presents on August 21, the feast of Pope
Pius X. The fact remains that there is still no contract signed by grape
growers and Cesar Chavez' union. There have been instead two deaths
since, that of Naji Daifullah, an Arab striker from Yemen, Arabia, and
of Juan de la Cruz of Delano. We attended the funeral service of Naji at
Forty Acres. A mile-long parade of marchers walked the 4 miles in a
broiling sun from Delano with black flags, black arm bands and ribbons,
and stood through the long service in the broiling sun where psalms from
the office of the dead were heard clearly over loud speakers and the
words from the book of Wisdom: "In the sight of the unwise they seemed
to die but they are at peace." There were Moslem chants, a liturgy with
which I am unfamiliar--but it was Arab music. (500 Arabs recently came
here from Yemen, Arabia--this land of opportunity--and one has met with
death at the hands of a deputy wielding a heavy flashlight which
fractured his skull.)

The Mass for Juan de la Cruz was offered by Bishop Arzube of Los
Angeles, Spanish-speaking, from Ecuador. Two men have shed their blood,
there are no contracts signed as yet, there has been a three-day fast
requested by Cesar Chavez, and a renewed zeal in boycotting lettuce and
grapes. There is no money left in the treasury of the union, especially
after death benefits have been paid to the families of the dead
strikers. One of the Mexican girls in jail told me proudly that their
$3.50 dues (comparing them with the Teamsters dues of $7.50) paid
benefits for lives born and lives lost. And there were all the clinics
operating at Calexico, Delano, Sanger and other places. The Farm
Workers' Union is a community to be proud of, and would that all our
unions might become a "community of communities" such as Martin Buber
wrote of in his **Paths in Utopia**.

(Sister Katherine, who was a fellow prisoner in Barracks B, is working
five days a week â€“ and what long hours!--here at the Ammon Hennacy
House, and the soup kitchen and clothing room in Skid Row, and she is so
like the sisters who have come to help us in her peace and joy and
diligence that I feel marvelously at home. She has typed out this column
for me.)

Prayer
------

I must mention a prayer I wrote in the front of my New Testament, and
hope our readers, while they read, say this for the strikers:

Dear Pope John--please, yourself a campesino, watch over the United Farm
Workers. Raise up more and more leader-servants throughout the country
to stand with Cesar Chavez in this non-violent struggle with Mammon, in
all the rural districts of North, and South, in the cotton fields, beet
fields, potato fields, in our orchards and vineyards, our orange groves
â€“ wherever men, women and children work on the land. Help make a new
order wherein justice flourishes, and, as Peter Maurin, himself a
peasant, said so simply, "where it is easier to be good."

Please help, Pope John, these rural workers to repossess the land in
co-ops, land trusts, with credit unions, clinics--a proliferation of
"the little way" of St. Therese. Help us, Pope John. **Amen**.
