%Another Letter to An Agnostic
% Dorothy Day

America, 5 (September 1, 1934):491.

*Summary: Witnesses to the authenticity of the Eucharist, and answers
the agnostic's objections of religion's cannibalism. Recognizing that
the Eucharist is a difficult teaching to accept, she argues that its
understanding lies in its simplicity. Christ nourishes through His
presence and accomplishes this through the most simple elements of life,
bread and wine. (DDLW \#54).*



Reprinted from **America**, September 1, 1934, with permission of
America Press, Inc., c.1934. For subscription information, call
1-800-627-9533 or visit
[*http://www.americamagazine.org*](http://www.americamagazine.org/)

[*Editorial Note:*The following is an actual letter addressed to
a friend, and the theological terms used, while not always the usual
technical ones, are to be taken in the orthodox sense intended by the
writer, as in many ascetical writings.]

It has been only with a great deal of hesitation that I sit down to
write this second letter to you, taking up the second objection you have
to religion. (It is interesting to note that your objections, as the
objections of most Communists and agnostics, are to the *Catholic*
Faith. The words *Catholic*and*religion*go together in your mind.)

Blasphemies one hesitates to set down on paper, they are so horrifying.
Many would put your second objection in this category. One nun to whom I
mentioned it shuddered involuntarily, but she did not try to meet it.
And in the past when I have heard it, and all Catholics have heard it
many times, I too did not try to answer. You made your objection in good
faith, not in any spirit of hatred or malice, and I have heard it made
in good faith before. So I think it is just as well to try to meet it
though it is hard, well-nigh impossible, to talk of such things to one
who has no faith. I am somewhat heartened by something I read this
morning in Faber, " It is our duty as well as our privilege to look into
this mystery."

You say you object to religion because it has a *cannibalistic*aspect
which revolts you. A twelve-year-old girl who was brought up with no
knowledge of the Christian religion said almost the same thing to me
last winter.

"Catholics believe that they eat the Body and Blood of Christ, don't
they?" she said, with a look of distaste. She too did not mean to
blaspheme. She was honest. And I'm going to send this letter to her,
too, when I have finished it.

I suppose I never felt this objection, this repulsion, because long
before I became a radical I had felt deeply the Mysteries of faith, not
*the*Faith, but faith nevertheless. I read the Bible when I was twelve,
and Wesley's sermons, picked up in a second-hand store, uplifted my soul
to God and I knew what my conscience was and what was good and evil. I
had once accepted the doctrine of the Holy Eucharist. So when I came
back to God there was not that difficulty to overcome.

It is easy for a little child to accept unquestioningly. That is why the
League of the Militant Godless is so anxious to keep religion from
little children. Because they know they will accept it, and though they
fall away afterward perhaps, in an arrogant and adventurous adolescence,
still is not so insuperably difficult to come back to it because there
is some kernel of truth lying hidden, there in the soul. You never had
any religious instruction when you were a child, so the difficulty is
there for you.

If you know the New Testament at all (and you ought to look into it if
you do not know it, for many Communists express an admiration for the
Man Jesus and I.W.W.'s in the old days used to speak of "Comrade
Jesus"), you will find there that the first to whom Christ taught this
doctrine of the Blessed Sacrament turned from Him at the hearing of it.

This teaching, that Christ would be their daily bread, was so simple, so
elemental a thing, in spite of its mystery that children and the
simplest and least of people in the world could understand and accept
it.

St. Teresa says that Christ is disguised as bread so that we will not
fear to approach Him -- so that we can go to Him in confidence, daily,
needing Him daily as we need our physical bread.

We are not, most of us, capable of exalted emotion, save rarely. We are
not capable of feelings of love, awe, gratitude, and repentance. So
Christ has taken the form of bread that we may more readily approach
Him, and feeding daily, assimilating Christ so that it is not we but
Christ working in us, we become more capable of understanding and
realizing and loving Him.

Yes, in bread, Christ has become so simple -- has condescended so far
that a child, a savage, can understand and eat the sacred food with love
and gratitude. He that we would be scandalized, so it is no use being
surprised and horrified at the bluntness of your objection. And even the
nearest and dearest of His friends were dispersed and fled, not
understanding or realizing the mystery of the Redemption, how Christ was
laying down His life for all men.

When He prayed in agony in the garden -- when all the weight of sins
descended upon Him, all the sins that had been and that would be
committed throughout the world forever after; when He suffered all the
temptations, all the horror, all the remorse for the rest of the world
-- His disciples did not understand that either. He watched and suffered
in His agony and prayed. He had told them that the next day He was to
die. And in spite of His miracles they paid so little attention to His
words that they slept, as the friend they loved most in the world
struggled against the thought of His death. They left Him alone, they
slept, and the next day they all fled so little did they understand His
teachings, though they had been with Him for three years and listened to
His talk.

They did not understand even after they had eaten with Him at the Last
Supper. They did not understand until the Holy Spirit descended upon
them and it was given to them to understand.

So how can I understand or try to tell you about it? If they who *lived*
with Him, who could see Him as man, eat with Him, sleep with Him, and
wander with Him through the countryside, if they were "offended" and
dispersed, how can I try to tell you what is in my heart? I do not ask
myself, "How can I try to overcome your objection?" Only God can do
that. I am not trying to convert you, but just trying not to let go
unchallenged your objections, for fear that my not answering would seem
to you a kind of denial of Him whom I love.

There is the question, why did Christ institute this Sacrament of His
Body and Blood. And the answer is very simple. It was because He loved
us and wished to be with us. "My delights are to be with the children of
men." He made us and He loved us. His presence in the Blessed Sacrament
is the great proof of that love.

St. Teresa of Avila said that we should meditate more on the love of God
for us, rather than our love for Him. And she emphasizes His sacred
*Humanity* and says that by never losing sight of that it is easier for
us to realize that love. She is always talking about the Man Jesus.

But it is hard to understand the love of God for us. We pray daily to
increase in the love of God, because we know that if we love a person
very much, all things become easy to us and delightful. We want, rather
unreasonably, sensible feelings of love. St. Teresa says that the only
way we can measure the love we have for God, is the love we have for our
fellows. So by working for our fellows we come to love them. That you
understand, for you believe that you are working for them when you give
hours every morning to the distribution of literature, climbing
tenement-house stairs, knocking at doors, suffering rebuffs, enduring
heat and cold, weariness and hardship, to bring to them what you
consider a gospel which will set them free.

And if you and I love our faulty fellow-human beings, how much more must
God love us all? If we as human parents, can forgive our children any
neglect, any crime, and work and pray patiently to make them better, how
much more does God love us?

You may say perhaps: "How do we know He does, if there is a He!" And I
can only answer that we know it because He is here present with us today
in the Blessed Sacrament on the altar, that He never has left us, that
by daily going to Him for the gift of Himself as daily bread, I am
convinced of that love. I have the faith that feeding at that table has
nourished my soul so that there is life in it, and a lively realization
that there is such a thing as the love of Christ for us.

It took me a long time as a convert to realize the presence of Christ as
*Man* in the Sacrament. He is the same Jesus who walked on earth, who
slept in the boat as the tempest arose, who hungered in the desert, who
prayed in the garden, who conversed with the woman by the well, who
rested at the house of Martha and Mary, who wandered through the
cornfields, picking the ears of corn to eat.

Jesus is there as *Man*. He is there, flesh and blood, soul and
Divinity. He is our leader who is always with us. Do you wonder that
Catholics are exultant in this knowledge, that their leader is with
them? "I shall be with you always, even to the end of the world."

Christ is bread on our altars because bread is the staple of the world,
the simplest thing in the world, something of which we eat and never get
tired. We will always have bread whether it is corn, wheat, or rye, or
whatever it is made from. We will always find wherever we go some staple
which is called bread.

We eat to sustain life; it is the most elemental thing we do. For the
life of the body we need food. For the life of the soul we need food. So
the simplest, most loving, most thorough thing Christ could do before He
died was to institute the Blessed Sacrament and hold up bread and say, "
This is my body," and wine and say "This my blood; take and eat. Do this
in commemoration of me." If you sat and thought forever and ever, you
could not think of any way for Christ to remain with us, which would
bring us closer to Him.

I could keep on writing and writing and never come to the end of this
letter, but I won't. I only hope that in your sincerity, which
acknowledges my sincerity, you will read it through. You know how much
emphasis Christ put on the "little ones" who are the majority. Not only
the children, but the poor and helpless. Those without learning when it
comes to reading books about the Blessed Sacrament or dialectic
materialism are another instance of what I mean.

With all my writing to you the products of my thought on this subject, I
can only end with the words of Jesus:

"I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto
babes: Even so, Father. For so it seemed good in thy sight."

For so it seemed good in His sight!
