% On Pilgrimage - February 1975
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1975, 2, 7.

*Summary: Contemplates the mysteries of birth and death, the continuing
strength of the youth and peace movements, examples of Peter Maurin's
"Green Revolution," and the passing of her long-time friend Maisie Ward.
(DDLW \#547).*

"Bless the Lord, O my soul, let all that is within me bless His holy
Name."

I know nowhere else to turn except to Scripture--The Bible--to express
exuberant emotion--joy and sorrow, thanksgiving, adoration, or petition.

So, this morning at seven o'clock, with the winter sun gilding the
skies, I turn to the psalms to express my joy and thanksgiving.

My granddaughter Maggie has just given birth in January, in West
Virginia, to her first child, a boy. Tamar, my daughter, phoned me from
Vermont to tell me about it.

Last month I wrote of the death of two of our former Catholic Workers
and now I write of birth--the mystery of new life which is always
sending up, even in the depths of winter from under snow and ice, new,
green shoots. Birth and death, great mysteries;--joys and sorrows,
exultation and anguish, how close they are. "Bless the Lord, O my soul,
let all that is within me bless His holy Name."

I wonder if Tamar, my daughter, is remembering how she herself had her
fourth child, also a son, on a winter night in West Virginia--all by
herself, while her husband floundered through mud and snow to help
release the midwife's car which had bogged down on muddy roads. The
other three children slept peacefully through the great event. What
fears and crises we all live through!

I cannot help write personally because many of you, our readers, have
lived through it all, one way or another. (When I read the personal
pronoun "I" in **David Copperfield**, I myself am David Copperfield.)

"There is neither Jew nor Greek, male nor female, bond nor free--we are
all one body, in Christ," St. Paul wrote. "We are all members, one of
another." Christ said, "I am the vine, ye are the branches." And the old
I.W.W., that "subversive" organization to which I once belonged, had as
their slogan, "An injury to one is an injury to all." (There is nothing
so radical, or subversive as Christianity.)

Peace Movement
--------------

Last month, someone asked Dick Gregory what had happened to the youth
movement and the peace movement, and he replied that it was **stronger
than ever**. All over the country the young are "opting out" of this
crazy social order of ours. One must question the use of the word
"order." Sometimes I recall that dread paragraph in Job, describing hell
as a place where "no order is, but everlasting horror dwelleth," which
is sometimes descriptive of parts of our war-torn, famished world.

What Dick Gregory meant by his encouraging words, which I recognize as
true, is the fact that radical youth on all sides of us are recognizing
that everything starts with their individual selves. They are becoming
personalists, making a beginning of a truly "personalist and
communitarian" revolution which is based on voluntary poverty and manual
labor. Peter Maurin said: "Be what you want the other fellow to
be."--instead of wasting good energy in attacking or resisting others.

To be truly nonviolent is to "resist not evil," turn the other cheek,
put aside all power, walk another mile, give up coat and cloak too. It
sounds like insanity to talk like this, repeating the words of Jesus,
yet over and over again circumstances in our lives force us into this
position. It is taking up our cross and following Him, Who said "My
cross is easy--my burden light."

The Little Way
--------------

To get down to cases--there is a strong, vital, healthy movement going
on among the young in many parts of the country. They are getting back
to the land, emphasizing voluntary poverty, manual labor, the crafts,
getting a piece of land near others, clearing it and making a start. If
they want the cash for tools, etc., they have to take any odd job and
earn it. If they want shelter, they have to cut logs for cabins and
build them.

We are seeing plenty of this activity in the Catholic Worker Movement,
and among Peacemakers and other groups. It makes the heart rejoice and
fill with hope, and even though it seems that wars will never end, and
suffering will never cease, man will not give up hope. "In the Cross is
joy of spirit," is a sentence from Thomas A. Kempis.

Chuck and Sandy in West Hamlin, West Virginia have become, for us,
leaders in what Peter called the Green Revolution. The phrase has been
used several times in relation to the other movements, so Chuck and
Sandy are changing the name of their paper, which up to this time has
been called **The Green Revolution**, to **The Mountain Worker**.
Consistently, Chuck Smith, the editor, has emphasized most perfectly the
personalist aspect of the land movement. The hollow and hills of their
acreage in West Virginia had only a cabin when they began. They are only
now working on a barn. Joined by Sandy soon after he started, Chuck has
purposely kept small. Compelled by visitors, they were forced to build a
guest house, which holds only two. No-one is encouraged to take over for
their own that visitor's room. The readers of **The Mountain Worker**
(until now **The Green Revolution**) visit for discussion or
clarification of their own thinking. They participate briefly in the
work and go on their way, perhaps more committed to a new way of life.
Fortunately, most young ones have bed rolls and "sleep out."

Some have returned to acquire acreage in the West Virginia mountains, so
now a land trust has been formed. There is cooperative food buying among
them of rice and other staples impossible to raise. I think there are
five or six farms involved now, including Maggie's and Bill's.

Some of the best all around accounts of this ferment which is going on,
among the young especially, is in**The Peacemaker**, 1255 Paddock Hills
Ave., Cincinnati, Ohio 45229. This small packed newspaper deals
extensively and specifically in works for peace, listing all those
imprisoned for conscience--refusing conscription; one valiant woman is
confined on Terminal Island for refusal to pay taxes (Martha Tranquilli,
Terminal Island, San Pedro, Ca. 90731). All those activities which we
Catholics call "works of mercy," are also performed by many Protestant,
Quaker, and other groups in the country.

We ourselves feel very close to The Peacemakers. For some years now
there have been summer Peacemaker Conferences at out farm at Tivoli. One
of the editorial contributors of this extraordinarily interesting sheet,
Peggy Scherer, organizer of last summer's conference at Tivoli, stayed
on with us and is giving us a year of her life--a wonderful
contribution. When it comes to doing a hard job, the first person one
thinks of is Peggy. She is always on hand, takes her turn at every job,
whether cooking or shopping or driving. The St. Joseph's House family at
First St. has gotten used to seeing this small, young woman piloting our
huge (comparatively speaking) truck, gift of the United Parcel Service,
several times a month back and forth between Maryfarm and St. Joseph's
House. It is an occasion for car-hopping, of course, especially during
the dull winter months. The tasks in the city, which call for a truck,
are getting our mailing out (almost 85,000 copies of the **CW** each
month) and collecting food at Hunt's Point market. The truck never goes
back to the farm empty. It is hard to believe, but rumor has it that
seventeen car-hopped their way to Tivoli the last time Peggy drove down.

Another Death
-------------

And now, as I finish this column, I am told of the death yesterday of
Maisie Ward. I am so thankful I had that last visit with her and Frank
Sheed, her husband, New Year's Eve, and we had a very happy afternoon,
Eileen Egan and I. She had been ill for some time and grieving that she
had to lay aside her work for India, which had meant much travelling,
writing, and lecturing these last years. Eileen Egan is writing a review
of Maisie's last book for this issue, and of Frank's latest one too.

My grateful memory of her begins with her visits to us in 1933, when we
had just begun to publish the **Catholic Worker**. Sheed and Ward
published Peter Maurin's **Easy Essays**, in England and America, and my
book some years later--**House of Hospitality**. Maisie and her husband
were our first friends and over the years our most faithful ones. My
heart aches with sympathy for Frank and his two children, Wilfrid and
Rosemary. But God had "blessed her with length of days,"--she was 85
when she died and hers was a full and fruitful life. I, too, will miss
her. Frank Sheed called up to tell us about the "wake," and the very
large funeral parlor, near St. Vincent Ferrer's Church where the Mass
was to be celebrated the next morning, was packed to the doors with a
multitude of friends. The church, next morning, was filled too, and long
lines of people whose lives had been touched by Maisie Ward went to the
communion rail to receive communion.

I have a new project now and I ask the cooperation of our readers for
it. I would like to have in our Catholic Worker library, which will be
housed at Maryhouse, a section devoted to all of Maisie Ward's books. It
is fitting that we have a complete account of this great woman's work.
In this way she will be with us still, and blessing us.

Maisie had concerned herself from the beginning of our work with a
similar work in England. There had been in the past a London **Catholic
Worker** for a brief time, and a house of hospitality in Wigan. Maisie
contributed to both and began her own extensive work in trying to
provide housing for the poor. Bob Walsh was editor of the English
**CW** and his wife, Molly, worked with Maisie to alleviate this dire
need in London.

We are praying Maisie will help us overcome the difficulties all the
State and City agencies have raised which are delaying the opening of
the house for the homeless women.

We want to assure our friends who are helping us with the gigantic (to
us) outlay of funds for practically rebuilding the fine old settlement
house back into a "residence," that, in spite of all obstacles, we
manage somehow to find corners to tuck people into out of the cold
during this interim of waiting. Perhaps our clouds of trouble do have a
"silver lining." Perhaps someday there will be a "Christ room in every
home." However, "misery loving company" as it proverbially does, many
small houses of 30 or 35 women would be not only better, but best, for
permanency.
