% Bill Gauchat: The Way of Peace
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1975, 3.

*Summary: Talks of means and ends by juxtaposing news of the end of the
Vietnam war with an obituary for Bill Gauchat. A close follower of Peter
Maurin, Bill Gauchat and his family exemplified a life built around all
the works of mercy. (DDLW \#551).*

My usual column, On Pilgrimage had already been written when the war in
Vietnam came to an end--**and we stand defeated.** I am happy to hear
news commentators, almost all of them, talking of means and ends.
Jacques Maritain, philosopher, and Peter Maurin, poor peasant and
teacher, both taught us since 1933 that we must work towards "the
purification of our means" to achieve the aims reviewed in this May Day
issue.

Bill Gauchat, who was Peter's follower almost from the first exemplified
these ideas in his life. He died April 16, after years of agony with
cancer of the spine, and donated his body to science. He was cremated,
his ashes buried in the little garden paradise which surrounds what
their house of hospitality has become. Our Lady of the Wayside, a home
for brain damaged, crippled and retarded infants and children. I have
come back from the funeral Mass which was both sorrowful and joyful.

Most of us wept at the beauty of it.

Bill met Peter in Cleveland during the depression, during the earliest
days of the Catholic Worker. Peter was deeply impressed with him, partly
because he had graduated from the School of Medieval Studies at the
University of Toronto. Bill had started the Blessed Martin House in
Cleveland and had the help of many grade school and high school
students. His wife Dorothy was one of the high school students who spent
all her spare time at the house. Later she went to Ade Bethune at
Newport, Rhode Island, as an apprentice, as many other young Catholic
Worker girls had done, including my own daughter. Bill and Dorothy
married and soon moved to the farm at Avon, Ohio, which had been given
to the work by one of our benefactors. Here their six children were
born. But their work in the CW movement went on.

Works of Peace
--------------

When we talk of means and ends, the most striking means in the world
today are the means of war and the means of the Works of Mercy as Jesus
taught his disciples. All the wars we have seen since 1933 when the
Catholic Worker began--the Ethiopian War, the Spanish Civil War, the
second World War, the Korean War, and now the Vietnam War--have not
achieved any of the ends we as a people have wanted, or been told we
were working for.

But the work Bill Gauchat spent his life for, the work of his wife and
his children, now many of them married and with children of their own,
still goes on. He has fed the hungry, clothed the naked. They continue
feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, caring for the most helpless. In
fact they performed all the works of mercy in one way or another. Their
work is a miracle in our day. The Church always includes the spiritual
works of mercy as well as the corporal, and when I think of them, I
think of the summer schools Bill used to hold on that small farm, during
Peter's lifetime, when an altar for Mass was set up in a field, and
classes were held, and conferences and discussions went on. This was
indeed "enlightening the ignorant, counselling the doubtful, comforting
the afflicted," holding up achievable goals which all of us could work
for.

Peter used to quote Lenin as saying, "There could be no revolution
without a theory of revolution," a peaceful and healing revolution,
preparing people to offer their lives for others in the ways described
in the Sermon on the Mount.

Bill Gauchat's papers and diaries and conversations with Peter Maurin,
and all the books Peter recommended and those about Peter, are contained
in a library at Our Lady of the Wayside built by one of Bill's sons--a
fitting memorial for this man who literally experienced that teaching of
Jesus, "Unless the grain of wheat fall into the ground and die, itself
remains alone. But if it dies it bears much fruit." His last suffering
years were a prolonged dying. It is good that during that dying he also
had the joy of seeing some of its fruits.
