% On Pilgrimage - July/August 1975
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1975, 2, 8.

*Summary: Meandering reflections on joy in the midst of trouble,
irritations mixed with beauty, peacemaking and resistance whilst threats
of war persist. Invokes numerous Saints. (DDLW \#553).*

This summer, at least 4 months of it, I am spending at Tivoli, and even
here one is hard-pressed by the trials and "trouble-ations" of the world
around us, but joys and sorrows always go together in our CW houses and
farms which are increasing and multiplying.

Helene Iswolsky, in one of her talks about Russia, quoted a peasant
saying that in a field where a poisonous weed was found, there was also
found its antidote.

This morning, outside my window a huge ship--The Star Nadine, Moravia, a
monstrous tanker--sailed seaward. Many times a day, long freight trains
pass. Usually tankers come up river to the Port of Albany to unload. But
to see them loaded up to the gunwales, decks almost awash, one wonders
what their cargo is. Sometimes life is a nightmare. Without the faith,
in this time of wars (not yet of pestilence, though germ warfare is
discussed) how can one be happy?

For me the Jesus prayer, used by the Russian pilgrim, is that remedy
growing in the field that Helene Iswolsky speaks of--the Jesus prayer in
the supernatural order and in the natural order. The lovely sweet clover
is blooming now, thickets of it, which Stanley and Rita and I picked
yesterday in the field off the CW property, down by the railroad tracks
and the river. Supernatural and natural joys so often go together.

Joy lifts the heart out of fears and forebodings. "Rejoice always," St.
Paul wrote, "and again I say rejoice." Joy brings with it courage also,
courage to endure.

There is a "rattling of sabers" again. This time the threats of the
Secretary of Defense that we might use nuclear weapons against North
Korea!

We never get very far away from the crises of our day. While we enjoyed
one of the two-week annual sessions of the Peacemakers, in June, we
could reflect that down the river on the property which used to be a
Christian Brothers school there is now a Korean "institute" of some
kind, bought by a South Korean.

Interruptions
-------------

It is Sunday, and I was writing this as a "meditation" and it is often
interrupted. Just now my oldest great-granddaughter, Tanya, came in
covered with dirt. On inspection I found she was covered with streaks of
resin from the tall pine tree near my little porch room and with it all
the dust and dirt which sticks to the resin. She delights in climbing to
the very top of the pine trees. My daughter Tamar's advice to me has
always been--"Don't look." (Nicky's, as a child was, "Not me," and
Mary's was "Me too!" I told this to the Allens at Tucson, Arizona, who
had ten children then and she said her motto was, "Let go--let God.")

Tanya's bath took quite a time. There are two baths on each floor and I
found the first filled with the laundry of one of our guests, all of
whom, I am happy to say, feel much at home and at ease hereabouts. The
three buildings fill to overflowing all summer and spill out on the
lawn.

Peacemakers
-----------

The Peacemakers discussed, among other subjects like voluntary poverty,
life styles, etc., the kind of demonstrations to show our determination
not to pay income tax which goes for building up monstrous implements of
war. Wally Nelson and his wife Juanita were there, both of whom are
familiar with arrests and jailings. I got acquainted with them years ago
when Koinonia, in Central Georgia, was literally under fire from the
small-towners all around them. Barns had been set afire, houses shot
into, fences cut down so that the cattle of the agricultural community
escaped. The late Clarence Jordan, the minister who started this now
thriving community, narrowly escaped death many times. The Nelsons, Ross
Anderson, who is also with us today, and I were there giving not only
moral but physical support. Ross and I (we are the same age) cooked for
the community and Wally risked his life going around in overalls as a
black farmer, trying to buy seed peanuts. Mrs. Jordan and I had
attempted this but were hounded by a carful of white men who shouted
that I was a Northern Communist whore! I'm not sure that they didn't add
Catholic to that. I had been called the same in newspapers in Memphis,
Tennessee, where the first agricultural union was being set up in the
Thirties. Lives were lost in those early years.

Where there is trouble, there the Peacemakers have been also, finding
the antidotes to hatred in every field.

Always there are numbers who stay on at Tivoli after the conference to
help catch up with the farm work. Others drift in, whom we presume are
peacemakers, but find out later are not. They are just passing by,
dropping in for a visit.

Friends of The Family
---------------------

There is a little known book of Dostoievsky called **The Friend of the
Family** which I often turn to for comfort. **The Friend of the Family**
has often been brought to mind around the CW. There are always those
who, with an air of authority, speak for the CW Movement and assume an
authority they do not have. There are of course all those (most of the
family) who try to follow Christ's example at the Last Supper when He
washed the feet of others. He had come to serve, not to exercise
authority.

Here at the farm no one wants to exercise authority--to be "in charge."
When a painful decision has to be made, a group gathers together and
discusses it earnestly and, I am sure, some of them prayerfully. In the
City, no one is ever "in charge." They just take turns "having the
house," which means having to say no to an aggressive drinker, or
separate men in a sudden, murderous quarrel.

But there are always others who assume authority which they do not have.
This problem has always and will always be with us.

One example of what we suffer happened years ago. A Bowery man carrying
a large, old fashioned typewriter in the direction of a pawnshop was
stopped by a policeman who asked him where he got it. "The Catholic
Worker," he answered. "They own all things in common, there."

The policeman brought him and the typewriter back to us, and we sadly
confessed to our ex-guest that such generosity wasn't quite our rule of
life as yet.

They are still mailing out the June issue at First Street. We were
shorthanded, and so later than usual. (They sent out eighty-five
thousand papers, not counting some taken by some of our very winsome
panhandlers to sell daily on the street. Maybe we will have to stop the
street selling.) "We are all made to be exploited," one of the family at
St. Joseph's house said.

Rain Needed
-----------

Farmer John tells everyone to pray for rain. "Tell St. Isadore the
Farmer our crops are burning up," he said this morning. This afternoon
it rained, but not enough. The thunder is still rumbling; it is humid
and sticky with enough lightning to have caused our house lights to go
off. "No reading tonight," someone groaned. "And I'm in the middle of a
good book."

As for me I have been going to bed at dark. If I put the reading lamp
on, the little porch where I sleep swarms with all kinds of insects that
fly in your eyes, your hair, your nose, your ears, and then in your
mouth of you leave it open. I have been pestered with all kinds of
insects, remembering St. Benedict Joseph Labre, the derelict saint of
Rome, who slept in doorways and disregarded his vermin. (The Montreal
house founded by Tony Walsh was named for him.) We will pray to him. We
do not have his endurance. There is also St. Francis Xavier. When he was
in the Indies, St. Ignatius wrote, begging news of how it was going with
this lonely apostle at the other end of the world. "I am interested to
hear even of the fleas that bite you," he wrote. And of course, speaking
of fleas, there was St. Teresa of Avila whose convent was plagued once
with some kind of insect and she wrote a song which her nuns sang in
procession, a song of petition, and was never afflicted again.

This is really no joke. The slums of New York, not to speak of rural
slums, are so afflicted, summers and winters, besides suffering rats and
mice.

We live in the midst of such unbelievable beauty, her at Tivoli on the
Hudson, that there has to be some fly in the ointment. There are so many
here suffering real illnesses; there are so many of the lonely, the sick
and depressed, homeless and wandering, that I must refer to the minor
irritations that afflict all of us lightheartedly.

Thundering again. A dead calm prevails. No sound of rain. Last Sunday,
New York subways were flooded, and no rain at Tivoli. St. Isadore, St.
Benedict Joseph, St. Francis Xavier, St. Teresa, pray for us. Not about
anything in particular. Just pray for us, and our readers, our writers
and all those who break bread with us.

**Thursday, July 10.** Late yesterday afternoon the rain started, a
gentle steady rain, heavy enough to keep everyone indoors, while Stanley
showed his slide shows. From my room I could hear gales of laughter and
cheers. His commentary, uninhibited by my presence, was full of his
usual dry wit.

In the afternoon we had a beautiful concert, violin and piano, given by
Dennis who lives with us much of the time, and Elizabeth Esher, our dear
neighbor who, with her husband, drives us to Mass and doctor
appointments when the cars are broken down or not available. Both are
accomplished musicians, and we had Vivaldi and Haydn and other
composers.

We have not had Mass in the Chapel for some time, but the Blessed
Sacrament is there, thanks be to God. Many make a morning meditation,
and there are evening Vespers.

Taxes
-----

Next issue, I will try to write more about federal income tax which is
providing the weapons for war--why we pay local taxes and not the
federal income tax. We recognize the seriousness of this and the risks
involved for families. The Bromley case is an example. Their house was
sold from under them in Cincinnati but they have not yet been evicted.
The price paid was excessively above its value. It looks like the
government is trying to make an example of them. (It was not bought by
friends and given back to them--an erroneous rumor; the Bromleys would
not have put up with a connived sale which would mean still more money
going to the government for war.)

This is a good and historic case, involving as it does, simple, plain
and powerless (?) people.

Which reminds me, **More Power Than We Know**, by Dave Dellinger,
published by Anchor Press - Doubleday, has just arrived.

Right now I am reading **Love and Success** by Dr. Karl Stern, (Farrar,
Straus and Giroux) a truly great collection of essays by a very learned
man. Both to be reviewed later.

One must have a quiet life, and have time to read slowly and
thoughtfully, to do a review. We do not have a quiet life here.
