% Articles on War and Pacifism
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, Various issues of the Catholic Worker

*Summary: Various articles by Dorothy Day on war, pacifism, and the
Catholic Worker positions on making peace. (DDLW \#563).*

["Our Country Passes from Undeclared War to Declared War; We Continue
Our Christian Pacifist Stand"](daytext.cfm?TextID=868)   DOC \#868,
Score = 80

**Summary:** A month after Pearl Harbor she reaffirms the gospel basis
of pacifism. Says she will not be carping in her criticism of our
country but refuses to participate in war. Recommends constant prayer,
the works of mercy, and mutual forbearance in disagreements.

["Pacifism"](daytext.cfm?TextID=215&SearchTerm=war%20or%20pacifism)  
DOC \#215, Score = 82

**Summary:** Outlines The Catholic Worker pacifist position: opposition
to class war, imperialist war, and war preparations. Calls for the
courage to disarm. "It takes a man of heroic stature to be a pacifist
and we urge readers to consider and study pacifism and disarmament in
this light."

["Why Do the Members of Christ Tear One
Another?"](daytext.cfm?TextID=390&SearchTerm=war%20or%20pacifism)   DOC
\#390, Score = 80

**Summary:** Protesting against a journalist's assertion that they are
sentimentalists in their pacifism and afraid of suffering, she
challenges her critics to spend time in the city slums where Catholic
Workers regularly battle the realities of disease, poverty, filth, cold,
foul smells, etc. Quoting Dostoevsky, she assures her readers that
Catholic Workers were not sanctimonious but approached their work with
true humility and love. Notes with irony that pacifism, while not
popular with society as a whole, was the philosophy which society wished
to impose on the poor and disenfranchised victims of America's class
war. Rejects the suggestion that they should remain silent.

["Catholic Worker
Positions"](daytext.cfm?TextID=519&SearchTerm=war%20or%20pacifism)   DOC
\#519, Score = 78

**Summary:** A concise restatement of the Catholic Worker philosophy
emphasizing personal responsibility, a decentralized society, direct
action, houses of hospitality, a revolution from below, and pacifism.

[Our Stand](daytext.cfm?TextID=360&SearchTerm=war%20or%20pacifism)   DOC
\#360, Score = 78

**Summary:** Reasserts their pacifist stand and opposes the use of force
in the labor movement, in class struggle, and struggles between
countries. Quotes Catholic theologians and Popes. Repeats that God's
Word is Love and that using only non-violent means is indeed "the Folly
of the Cross." Doubts that the conditions for a "just war" can be met in
these times.

["The Use of
Force"](daytext.cfm?TextID=306&SearchTerm=war%20or%20pacifism)   DOC
\#306, Score = 78

**Summary:** Argues that Christians should not take up arms in the
Spanish Civil War. Points to Christ, the Apostles, and martyrs whose
willingness to suffer led to victory. Opposes the Communist cry to use
force. Prays "give us the courage to suffer." Keywords: pacifism, non-violence.

["In Peace Is My Bitterness Most
Bitter"](daytext.cfm?TextID=250&SearchTerm=war%20or%20pacifism)   DOC
\#250, Score = 78

**Summary:** Expresses her anguish over the works of war in Vietnam,
which are the opposite of the works of mercy. She is upset with
churchmen calling for "total victory," and notes that the Church is our
Mother even though "she is a harlot at times." Calls on each person to
work on changing their hearts and attitude.


