% On Pilgrimage - December 1976
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1976, 2, 8.

*Summary: Describes work around the farm at Tivoli, the peaceful death
of a companionable worker, and her Winter reading about religion in
Russia. (DDLW \#575).*

t is a beautiful sunny day, midwinter in Tivoli. No wind to chill the
bones, and the children, those who are not napping, are out playing on
the lawn. Only Tanya goes to school and she will be home soon.

The men are hauling wood down from the hillside, clearing out dead
trees, and Check Matthei and Charles Goodding have brought loads of
driftwood from the Hudson which flows majestically by the three houses
which make up Tivoli Farm.

The Indians called the Hudson "the river which flows two ways." It is a
tidal river and driftwood and later ice flow down and up stream with the
tide. I've probably written this before but I cannot get over the wonder
of it. There is no ice yet, but I just saw a wagon load of drift wood,
tree trunks and logs go by the window towed by John Filliger's tractor,
which he bought and fuels with his own money. He had worked during all
the W.W.II years and only now is collecting his unemployment benefits. A
tidy sum came to him, and besides helping out many needy brethren he
bought a tractor. The machine eats up the oil from the earth and gives
nothing back! But John will use his own money for oil. Men love
machines!

Once, on the Newburgh farm we had two white horses. They had done well
on the Easton, Pa. farm but when we arrived at Newburgh, some miles
inland from the Hudson, the shale was too much for their poor feet. They
were not much good for farming. "Lets give them a bag of oats and send
them off down the road," Tom Sullivan said heartlessly. I think we sold
them to a neighboring farmer who had good soil. (Some day the story of
our farming efforts -- our farming communes which became retreat houses,
which became hotels on the side of the road -- will be told in detail
little by little.) Peter Maurin wanted Agronomic Universities, and we
can boast of a certain synthesis we have at times achieved of cult,
culture and cultivation, as he termed it.

Our chapel is beautiful. Four windows behind the altar look out on the
river, clusters of evergreens, blue skies and the sun pouring in all
day, since the room faces south. Tina de Aragon's statue of Our Lady,
carved from Lignum Vitae, the heaviest wood in the world, is almost four
feet tall and stands on a table surrounded at the moment by dry corn
stalks. There is also a white bowl of flowers, and green and bright pink
give a tender touch to the sculpture. On the other side of the altar is
the tabernacle where the lamp glows day and night. Above is a photograph
of St. Therese, the Little Flower. On the altar, at present, is a
gorgeous bowl of chrysanthemums, sent me on my birthday by Tom Sullivan,
one of our former editors.

A score of people can be accommodated in this one room and an equal
number in the room adjoining it, which is a library of spiritual
reading. Both rooms really make one large, open chapel, the quietest
place in the house.

Work-Work-Work
--------------

All the past summer and fall was a time of all kinds of work - repairs
to the roof and the ceiling of the large living room which had fallen
down. Repairs cost altogether \$25000. How we got the money to pay for
that (and a lot of the work was done by our own people) is an
interesting tale. A group of Puerto Ricans had purchased together some
acreage a few miles up the road and were not prepared to settle on or
work it. So they offered us the use of their vineyard, four acres of
grapes which our young people, in February, pruned and tied and later
cultivated and harvested. It was hard work and handled by a disciplined
crew. That work brought in the two thousand dollars necessary to pay for
our new sewage system. The leaking roof was paid for by the same group,
only this time it was strawberry picking in June. Stoop labor, indeed.
Peter Maurin was surely right when he said there was "**no unemployment
on the land**." If you have land!

The extensive repairs of the ceiling were accomplished by two students
from Iowa, who spent their strength and the three hundred dollars
donated by their friends, and by Jean's parents. Al and Monica Hagan.
Just before they left, they hauled in a beautiful, large rug (a villager
discarded it!) which is a warm playground for the little ones these cold
wintry days. How can we thank them -- Jean and Greg! May their lives by
long and happy!

Gordon
------

A very deep sorrow fell upon us in November. Gordon McCarthy who had
worked with us for the last fifteen years, at least, died very suddenly
and peacefully. He got up from a quiet and companionable lunch, went
into the living room to his favorite Morris chair, and putting his head
back, quietly died. It was so sudden there was no time for grief. We
called the emergency squad at Red Hook and the priest, and both arrived
almost immediately. Gordon was anointed as he lay on the stretcher. He
lies now in our cemetery plot beside Helen Iswolsky and the others who
have died with us these last twelve years.

How many long and companionable evenings we had spent together in our
own dining room, where Rita did some of her drawings, Stanley played
chess, or some classical music on his tape recorder, and some of us read
and exchanged detective stories. (Our latest enthusiasm is for the
Australian ones, the "Boney" books, named for the aborigine detective,
Napoleon Bonaparte, who to my mind, surpasses Sherlock Holmes.) Gordon
always kept track of our choice selections.

His other enthusiasm was the World Series. It was relaxing to talk to
him. He had a most sympathetic understanding of peoples' problems and
needs! How we miss him.

Farmer John, Marcel, Gordon, are the three who could take care of any
emergency of furnace, plumbing, electricity. How old was he? He seemed
young to me, and strong, and dependable. We miss him. He died in peace.
May he rest in peace. He is added to the list of my missal who are
remembered daily.

Winter Reading
--------------

Detective stories relax and distract one's minds but I have had some
stimulating reading this month - a long and heavy book published by the
University of Chicago Press in 1971 - **Aspects of Religion in the
Soviet Union 1917 - 1967**. It is made up of 20 articles by twenty
authors. So far I have only had time to browse around in it - especially
one chapter - "Religious Themes in Soviet Literature."

There are many quotations from Pasternak's poetry both in Russian and
English and they are of incomparable beauty. There is much of Marine
Tsvetaeva (1892-1941) and Anna Akhmatova (1888-1966) quoted. A.
Sinyavasky, who wrote of Pasternak's poetry, speaks of the "vitality of
nature" . . . . "All conquering and saving," bearing witness to the
"greatness of life, to the immeasurable value of existence."

These words "spoke to my condition" as the Quakers say. It is wonderful
how such a weighty piece of the history of our times falls into one's
hands, just when there is time and quiet to read and relish it. It was
probably sent to us to review in 1971 and I certainly recommend it
heartily, though I am quite incapable of giving it the review it
deserves

Wear, tear and breakage have depleted our supply of sheets, towels,
blankets and cups at St. Joseph House, Maryhouse and the Tivoli Farm. If
you have any to spare, we can use them.
