% On Pilgrimage - September 1977
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1977, 2, 7.

*Summary: Recounts a visit by her daughter Tamar and granddaughter Katy.
Other friends visit as well including Nina Polcyn and Dorothy Gauchat.
Day remembers Nina's involvement in a protest in 1934 against the
landing of the German liner, Bremen. She also remembers fondly Dorothy
Gauchat's husband Bill, of whom Peter Maurin thought highly as well.
(DDLW \#580).*

Autumn, 1977
---

In many ways, this has been a good summer for me, since I spent most of
it on the beach in Staten Island, where we have two small bungalows,
where the workers at St. Joseph's and Maryhouse can go for rest from the
hard life in the city.

My daughter came down from Vermont for a spell, and even here she
occupied herself with spinning. As soon as she arrived she got some
pieces of wood from the beach, carved herself a spindle, and spun enough
yarn to weave me a pair of bedroom slippers! I had wool on hand with
which I was going to stuff some small pillows - - for the small of the
back, or the back of the neck, while reading in bed. No sooner had she
arrived, when her youngest of nine children, Katy, came in with a school
friend she was visiting in New York.

There were other visitors too, this busy summer - - Nina Polcyn Moore
and Dorothy Gauchat, both of them a generation removed from me, but
working with the Catholic Worker since its beginnings. Nina was still
going to college (Marquette) when she visited us in the summer of 1934,
just in time to join in anti-Hitler protests. One of them was against
the docking of the **Bremen**, a German liner, on the upper west side of
New York City. When a protester climbed a mast to pull down a flag
flaunting the swastika, and was shot in the leg by a guard, a riot
ensued on the docks. We fled down the street, together with other
protesters to escape a squad of police, and witnessed some police
brutality, which we later protested against too. It was time of urgent
protest against a wave of anti-Semitism, which was breaking out here and
there in those days.

One of the reasons this occasion is vividly in my mind today is because
I have recently read Chaim Potok's books - - all of them - - with the
greatest interest. I encountered the first when I was on a renewal
retreat last year, and picked up My Name is Asher Lev.

Last night I read**In the Beginning**, which is a vivid account of the
Depression and the time of World War II. I have also read Potok's **The
Chosen** and **The Promise**.

Peter Maurin used to say, "We should study the past, and so live in the
present, as to make the future different."

Nina and I have kept up our friendship over the years, and even made a
brief tour of Russia together, (a guided tour with Dr. Jerome Davis)
some years ago. Now she is living in Sauk Center ("Main Street") in
Minnesota. Her life is still as full of variety as mine is!

Dorothy Gauchat has also been long a part of the Catholic Worker family.
As a high school student, she was a volunteer at the Cleveland House of
Hospitality (and Farm at Avon, Ohio), and later married its director,
Bill Gauchat, who died a few years ago. They gave up the work in the
city and concentrated on the Farm, where Peter Maurin used to go, to
conduct "summer schools" for a number of years, attended by Catholic
Workers from all the Houses of Hospitality which sprang up around the
country.

Peter Maurin felt a great kinship with Bill, because the latter had
attended the Institute of Medieval Studies at Toronto, and Peter always
felt Bill understood his ideas better than anyone else. Peter used to
declaim, "When the Irish were Irish a thousand years ago," and to tell
how they started universities all over Europe, and kept alive what Peter
called a synthesis of Cult, Culture and Cultivation.

Bill died a few years ago, and Dorothy Gauchat has built up the work
they started early in their married life, when they lived on this farm.
It is one of boundless hospitality, taking care of "the lame, the halt
and the blind" children God has sent them. Dorothy has written a book,
**All God's Children**, which is still in print. We have a box on hand
of their beautiful and happy story - - how it first began, how it all
came about.

There is an old saying, which I have used often in sending out an appeal
when funds are running low, and there are, even now, requirements by
state law (and often common sense) as to repairs and the running of a
house of hospitality. That saying is - - "A baby is always born with a
loaf of bread under its arm," which delighted me with its simplicity.
Dorothy Gauchat lives by this principle and her work has grown.

After visiting me both on the beach and in New York, where I now am at
Maryhouse, Dorothy went on to Newport to see Ade Bethune, who has been
one of our artists for many years. Ade is making a study of solar
heating, and the two women are putting their heads together to figure
out the winterizing of a large swimming pool built at Avon for their
crippled little ones (who swim daily, or float - - with life preservers,
of course!)

Gratitude
---------

During the month, many friends have sent me large print Bibles, one of
which is now in our chapel downstairs, and one each at the beach,
Maryhouse and the farm at Tivoli. I am truly grateful to those who sent
them. I like to use one of my favorite quotations from St. Teresa of
Avila - - "I am so grateful a person that I can be bought with a
sardine" - - but I apologize at seeming irreverent, and I promise to
pray for the donors as I do my daily reading.

One line in Potok: "I wonder if gentiles clasp Holy Scripture in their
arms and dance with it, as we Jews do?" Well - - I've often seen people
kiss the Book before and after reading it, and I do myself.
