% On Pilgrimage - July/August 1978
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1978, 2, 8.

*Summary: Complains that she needs to rest her heart at the beach house
instead of joining a demonstration at the UN. Reminisces about friends,
greets visitors, mentions her reading, and recalls the start of the
movement when she met Peter Maurin. (DDLW \#590).*

Patience! Patience! The very word means **suffering**. I'm glad I
studied Latin for five years. Being a journalist, I use many words, and
like to get at the roots of them.

I had planned to go to the Mobilization For Survival demonstrations for
disarmament at the United Nations last month, but my heart "went back on
me" and a deplorable state of weakness kept me on the beach on Staten
Island, where we have two bungalows for rest houses. I can at least
pray. **"At least!"** What an expression! It is hard work, praying, and
trying to subdue a rebellious spirit.

Deane Mowrer came down from Tivoli with Kathleen Rumpf for the sit-in on
June 12th at the United States Mission to the Nations. Twenty from the
Catholic Worker were arrested, and arraigned, and released. I had so
counted on going with them.

Christ said, "He who takes the sword will perish by the sword." We are a
guilty nation, threatening this beautiful, natural world with neutron
bombs.

But all times are dangerous times! I often think of my mother, a most
dearly loved mother to all her five children, saying to me in her last
days – "Don't pray I live longer. I've been through the San Francisco
earthquake, the Florida hurricane, and two World Wars, and I've had
enough." But she smiled as she said it, because she had been a happy
wife and mother.

\* \* \*
---

Charles Elston, archivist, and Marc Ellis, who wrote a thesis on the
Catholic Worker, which will be published, visited us from Marquette
University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. They packed up what we had collected
of the Catholic Worker archives (mostly correspondence), which are kept
at Marquette.

I love the Middle West, having spent so many years growing up there –
from my ninth to my eighteenth year. Two of those years I spent at the
University of Illinois, where Rayna Prohme was my dearest friend. Her
story was made memorable by Vincent Sheehan in his **Personal History**,
in the section called "Revolution."

\* \* \*
---

"Doth it not irk me that upon the beach, the tides monotonous run? Shall
I not teach the sea some new speech?" Who wrote it? Those lines came to
mind when I woke this morning. It certainly doesn't irk me! I love it
here.

Rosemary Morse was up early, reading Scripture, but brought me food for
the body and a hot cup of coffee. Then she worked all afternoon, mending
the screen door, and, on the roof, stopping leaks. The Pentecostal
movement has made her an avid reader of Scripture. She is a living
example of co-ordination – the active, the contemplative, and the
ecumenical life. But the roof still leaks!

Red roses, and red and yellow ones by the back door are all in bloom.

\* \* \*
---

Mary Humphrey from Minnesota (a Catholic Worker for years) called. Fr.
Henry Fehrens will drive her out to see me. He helps, during the summer,
at St. Patrick's Parish in Richmond, Staten Island, a parish where
Tamar, my daughter, went to boarding school many years ago. Fr. Aldo Tos
is a pastor there. Sisters of St. Dorothy, a Portugese community, had a
small boarding school there. Tamar used to come home weekends to Mott
Street.

When Mary arrived with an armful of fresh, new, summer dresses she had
made, I greeted her wearing a colorful one she had made for me years
ago. Every time I visited her in the past, she made me a dress. She and
her husband (a gold and silver smith, specializing in chalices) raised
their family in Minnesota (they are among our oldest friends) but were
originally from the Milwaukee Catholic Worker group. The Chicago,
Milwaukee, and Minnesota groups were all made up of brilliant, young
volunteers, trying out our ideas in the city and on the land, with
crafts their specialty.

\* \* \*
---

Breakers rolling in on the beach – the air is damp – a flannel nightgown
and **two** blankets are necessary if the windows are open.

Pat and Kathleen Jordan, our fellow workers and beach neighbors here,
start on their trip to the West Coast tomorrow, with Justin and Hannah,
to show Justin, born this last year, to his grandparents. Pat has been
working at St. Rose's cancer home, which was started by Rose Hawthorne
in the early thirties or before. Bill Griffin also works there. Bill
lives with Jacques Travers, who runs the Arthur Sheehan house of
hospitality for men near Prospect Park in Brooklyn. But he is staying at
Pat and Kathleen's house during their absence and commuting to work.

Jacques once gave a great talk on Emmanuel Mounier (one of Peter
Maurin's favorite philosophers) at Tivoli, on Sunday afternoon, with
Mary Lathrop Pope giving readings from Mounier, to illustrate the points
Jacques made.

\* \* \*
---

July 6th – a busy day! In the morning, to New York City, and, in the
afternoon, Cardinal Cooke, Monsignor Murray and Father McDonough visited
from Maryhouse, to bring me greetings from Pope Paul! I was overwhelmed
by this. How one dreads such honors when inactive. Though it was in my
name, it is young women and men volunteers who are doing all the work,
getting out the paper, running the house of hospitality, etc. One feels
like a figurehead!

\* \* \*
---

Opera on the radio – "Tannhauser." The bay is filled with an uncountable
number of sailboats.

Tamar, my daughter, who is visiting me from Vermont, found a bag of wool
in the closet, left from her last visit, and is working on it. She
washed it, carded it, spun the yarn with a hand-carved spindle, and is
finishing a sweater for one of her grandchildren.

I have finished the first volume of **The Collected Essays, Journalism
and Letters of George Orwell** (Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., New
York). A great human being. I had read his **Road to Wigan Pier** and
**Down and Out in Paris and London**.

I am also reading C. S. Lewis' book, **Reflections on the Psalms**, with
great profit.

- - -

Stanley Vishnewski came down for a visit, bringing some mail. Also,
Margaret Quigley from the Davenport, Iowa house of hospitality visited
one afternoon. Stanley, Tamar and I walked and sat on the beach.
Complete quiet. We collected stones, a beautiful, colorful variety.
Every day, I am promising myself to walk a little more, to get my
strength back.

Doris Neilsen brought me a stationary rocker, very comfortable. Haven't
seen one like it in years. The bungalow is **crowded**. How we
accumulate things – comforts!

My brother John and his wife Tessa visited. A beautiful day, not too
hot. They met on this South Shore of Staten Island years ago. They were
both only eighteen, but promptly fell in love and got married, much to
our parents' dismay. But it has been a happy marriage, with sons and
grandchildren now. They were living with me on Fifteenth Street in New
York, and I have often said that if it had not been for Tessa de Aragon
Day I would never have met Peter Maurin, and there would have been no
Catholic Worker. It was her Spanish hospitality which welcomed this
French peasant when he came to our door. (He had gone to the
**Commonweal** magazine first, and George Shuster, editor then and
knowing me as an "activist," sent him to me.) It was the Great
Depression, the Hunger Marches, and Peter Maurin, Master Agitator, as he
liked to call himself, who started it all, by coming to my door with his
program, which still goes on, of round table discussions "for the
clarification of thought," houses of hospitality for the practice of
"the works of mercy," and farming communes "to raise what you eat and
eat what you raise."
