% On Pilgrimage - October/November 1978
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October-November 1978, 3, 7.

*Summary: Snippets expanded from her diary: recollection of early
Russian friends, visitors, the death of Pope John Paul I and election of
John Paul II, books, and operas. Says sex is fundamental but religion
transfigures it. (DDLW \#593).*

(My column " On Pilgrimage" is culled from expanding hints in my diary.)

Staten Island, Late September
-----------------------------

Woke early with a cricket on my window sill, sawing away at his fiddle,
and bringing back to my mind my very early happy days on the beach in
Staten Island (long before there was a Catholic Worker), perhaps a mile
away from our present little bungalow, where many of the Catholic Worker
crew vacation now. One summer especially, the cicada sang in the trees
during the day, and in the fall the crickets. Next door, the Maruchess
family lived. Sasha came from Tula, where Tolstoi lived, and Freda, his
wife, from a Russian-German background. Down the road, Mike Gold and his
brother, Manny Granich, had a bungalow, and their kosher mother brought
them her own dishes when she visited them. The Maruchess family had
actor friends â€“ the Bulgakovs, and Varya Bulgakov was learning a part to
play at the Eva LeGalliene Theatre on W. 14th Street. The play was
**Cricket on the Hearth**. Her husband was already in a Broadway
Play--**Street Scene** I think it was. Both, I believe, were from the
prestigious Moscow Art Theatre company. There was also Irinar
Dzarjevsky, a "basso profundo," who had become so rheumatic from his
life in the trenches on the Russian front in World War I that he had to
hold on to a fence in walking up and down the little lane to limber up
in the morning. He sang in the Koshetz choir. (My memory and my spelling
may be faulty!)

In late September, Freda and Sasha rented a big apartment, one flight
up, across and down the street from the 14^th^ Street Theatre, and
cooked and served dinners to the theatre group. It was a family affair,
a neighborhood affair, and in those early 20's quite common uptown and
downtown, in or out of theatrical circles.

I remember very well the play, **The Three Sisters** by Chekov, which my
sister and I went to see, and how we boasted of having a "Masha" dress,
a dismal black affair, which we wore when we were in a somber, Russian
mood.

For some reason or other, **The Cricket on the Hearth** was a play
favored by this theatre group, and I coached Varya in her study of it.
Hence these nostalgic, early morning thoughts.

I use the word nostalgic, because another book that came my way these
last months was **So Short a Time**, an unbearably tragic book, because
so true. It was a biography by Barbara Gelb of John Reed and Louise
Bryant, and what they went through in the Russian Revolution. I knew
Jack Reed when I worked for the old **Masses,**and I knew (slightly)
Louise Bryant. Later, I worked for **The Liberator** when Bob Minor was
the editor.

Stanley Vishnewski found this book for me. Stanley is our book finder.
He bought me **The First Violin**by Fothergill, a very romantic novel I
love. He also found **The Gadfly** by Vornick. It is fun to read old
favorites.

Maryhouse, N.Y. City, October
-----------------------------

A bright, sunny, cold morning . Last Night, I saw a film about
Harlem on television, showing some of the beautiful architecture there,
like ours here on Third Street. The sun is creeping down the buildings
across the street. Elaborate carvings on the frames around the windows,
different on every floor. I sit in my window often, looking at them, and
watching neighbors on the street. On First Street, opposite St. Joseph
House, there is an abandoned, corner tenement building from which the
carvings of angels and flowers have been carefully removed.

Kassie Temple and Kathy Clarkson are back from a visit in Nova Scotia.
They brought me a cassette tape message from Dixie McMaster. I had
visited her in Montreal and later in Antigonish, Nova Scotia. With
Dixie's help, I first became associated with Little Brothers and Sisters
of Jesus. Peter Maurin had told me of this new order (or is it
association) of Charles de Foucauld, founded in our time. I have also
visited the little Sisters in Washington, D.C. and in the desert in
Arizona.

I read my morning Psalms in the Anglican prayer book and hymnal which
Ann Perkins gave me--it is so much easier to find ones way around in.
The words "ordinary time" in our own prayer book put me in a state of
confusion and irritation. To me, no times are "ordinary." C.S. Lewis did
us all a great service in writing his book on the Psalms, a beautiful
and most readable commentary.

The death of Pope John Paul the First was a terrible shock. We saw his
funeral on television. My eyes are worn out from watching it.

Jeanette Noel, who had my father's Bible rebound for me, is visiting
here from the Ammon Hennacy House in Bubbardston, Mass., which recently
burned down.

Todd Gauchat, son of Dorothy and Bill Gauchat, was operated on in
Minnesota, to recover his speech. Todd is a valiant student who has
cerebral palsy, but has gotten through high school, and is going on with
his studies. He got through high school thanks to a keen mind and a
specifically-constructed typewriter.

Fr. Don Hessler visited and "healingly" blessed Stanley and me (who were
the only ones around). He is very much into the Pentecostal movement in
the Church. He is a Maryknoll priest who, with Fr. Meyer, spent the
Second World War interned in Hong Kong when the Japanese took over. Food
was so scarce, they ate every green--every blade of grass that grew on
that border city.

Peggy Scherer is back from several months in Guatemala and Mexico. She
brought me a beautiful, little, wooden Cross on a fine chain, and a
little, woven purse, bless her!

John and Margaret Magee called from the airport, on their wat to Rome.
What a wonderful time to be there!

Tom Cornell brought a visitor from Germany, Werner Dierlamm, who
represents a coalition of a German groups--Mennonites, Church of the
Brethren, Ammon Hennacy also wrote about them.

"Happy are the people the Lord has chosen for His own." The Jews are
indeed God's chosen, and **God does not change**. I read a long
interbiew with Chaim Potok. My heart warms to him. His books are all
beautiful, bringing to my mind the high esteem in which Jewish men hold
their wives, mothers of their households.

Watched a documentary on television, "The Chosen People" with Ellie
Wiesel. (I am reading his book **Night**.)

To have lived through the Fr. Coughlin era is indeed to have seen
something of the persecution of God's chosen. Msgr, Edward Lodge Curran,
the Brooklyn anti-Semite, wanted to buy The Catholic Worker for \$2,000.
Naturally we refused. To Fr. Coughlin's credit, he did, with the
contributions of his immense following, build a great number of rural
churches in the deep South, which I came across on my speaking trips
around the country. But his talk of international Jewish bankers stiffed
up a wave of anti-Semitism.

Columbus Day--Stanley went to the parade on Fifth Avenue. He has always
distributed **The Catholic Worker** at parades. It was often taken as a
Roman Catholic "cell's" work of the Communist Party (boring from within,
as the saying goes).

Read some of the Golden Notebooks by Doris Lessing. She seems to make a
religion of sex. Sex is, of course fundamental, but religion
transfigures it. Dostoevsky's "love in practice is a harsh and dreadful
thing, compared to love in dreams" is a half truth. Or rather, love is a
cross--transfiguration a necessity.

The house is cold this morning. Sometimes, the water is hot enough for
an immediate, hot drink, but nothing works this a.m. St. Therese of
Lisieux said there was nothing she suffered from so much as cold, and
since then Carmelite convents have been heated in the winter.

I listened to Richard Wagner's "Lohengrin" on the radio last night. Tom
Hoey had been given eight tickets to the New York City Opera's
production of "The Marriage of Figaro"--Deane Mowrer and others went. I
prefer Wagner, pagan that he is.

There has been much discussion about closing the farm at Tivoli. The
three houses there make squatters a problem. John Filliger, our farmer
since the 1936 seamen's strike. And George Collins our saintly hermit
and pot washer, since he came from jail after World War II, have been
with us for many years. We must pray to St. Therese--"All things work
for good to those who love God." Reading old diaries, I find the same
unrest as the last year I was at the farm. Our human condition--our
discontent. "Now is the winter of our discontent."

Ed Forbrand sent over to me the **Collected Works of Teresa of Avila**,
and also Michael Minihan's translation of Dostoevsky by Konstantin
Mochulsky, which he had dedicated to Helene Iswolsky. While she lived
with us at the Farm. She gave him and others much valuable help.

Went to noonday Mass at Nativity Church, and then lunch with Anne and
Steve Kaune at their beautiful apartment on First Street, many of our
young people can make beauty in the dingiest slum.

"How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of the man who brings
tidings of peace, joy and salvation." On Friday, October 20^th^, Danny
O'Shea of the Rochester, N.Y. Catholic Worker House (formerly here with
us in the city) was ordained in that diocese. Many from here have gone
up to the ordination. St. Joseph House, Rochester, was the third house
of hospitality to open (after New York and Boston) and is a very good
one. There have been many vicissitudes, but many happy meetings there,
and not Father Danny O'Shea is running it. The Trappist monks nearby
Piffard, N.Y. bake bread and supply the Rochester house.

On Saturday, October 21st Hilaire Hennessy, my youngest grandson, and
Erin Schuerger were married in Perkinsville, Vermont. Tamar and all of
her nine children and 14 grandchildren were there. Hilaire and Erin, and
also Katy, my youngest granddaughter, went to the East High School,
Chester, Vermont. Maggie Corbin, who lived with my daughter these last
years, is going there now also, teaching spinning and weaving for her
tuition. Katy is going to travel around the country, to keep in touch
with former pupils of the school.

On Sunday, October 22nd, the inauguration Mass of our new Pope John
Paul II (Karol Cardinal Wojtyla of Poland, the 264^th^ Pope and the
first non-Italian Pope since 1529) was televised from Rome. I sat at the
TV from the early hours until it was time for our Sunday Mass here at
Maryhouse. Nina Polcyn Moore of Minnesota is Polish, and we visited
Warsaw together on our trip to Russia in 1972.

Sunday afternoon, I had a visit from my granddaughter Maggie and Bill
Ragette and their two children, Oak and Hickory. They were on their way
home to West Virginia from Vermont, after weeks of apple picking and
celebrating Hillaire's wedding.

Fr. John J. Hugo used to remind us that "He who says he has done enough
has already perishedâ€¦" and "You love God as much as the one you love the
least." I recall his words often. He has been a great influence on the
lives of our Catholic Workers.
