% The Satan Bomb
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1950, 2.

*Summary: Juxtaposes images of resignation, poverty, and fear over the
H-bomb tests with hopeful words from Julian of Norwich and the Mass of
the dead. Says we should not fear death but judgement, and live
accordingly. (DDLW \#609).*

P\.SMOKY Joe was talking about the Hydrogen bomb. Of course, everyone
has been talking about it. "Hell bomb, satan bomb, that's what I call
it," he said. "The devil came up and taught Americans how to make it.
For me, I've drunk lots of it on the Bowery."

"Why worry," is the attitude of the poor, the desperate, "We all have to
die. Can't get out of it."

Our rooms at 115 Mott street, both in St. Joseph's house and Maryhouse
can be pretty grim at times. Some women can make a bit of heaven out of
some paint, curtains, soap and water, and the place looks neat and
comfortable. Others accumulate trash, are dirty and verminous and it is
hard to keep up with the job of order. Once a doctor who volunteered his
help came to visit a sick woman and looking around the room he said,
"This is worse than war or revolution. It is worse than death."
Destitution is sometimes a fearful thing, so ugly, so tawdry, so
heartbreaking, conducive to despair.

During the war when we read of the evacuation of Paris, we came upon the
line, poignant and meaningful, "And only the very poor remain." All the
city was fleeing. But nothing was worse than the destitution of the
poor. Last night over the radio the last thing heard was the statement
of a University of Chicago professor that a poisonous dust scattered by
the H. bomb meant the death of the world. Another commentator said that
if we were to make the bomb then it was necessary also to evacuate all
the coastal cities, that it was impossible to defend them. The first
thing in the morning the news is repeated, the world is doomed. Every
morning, every hour, on the hour, all through the day, the news is
repeated. People are beginning to say, "This kind can only be thrown out
by prayer and fasting." Others try to recapture the war time mood of
"anything is permitted, life is short." Still others become flippant,
like Joe.

The best comment we can find is that of Juliana of Norwich, who wrote
from her anchorhold back in the twelfth century, "All will be well, and
all will be well, and all will be very well," and in another place she
wrote, "The worst has already happened, and that has been repaired." And
it was man's first fall that she was thinking of, the scars of which we
are still wearing, and she was thinking of it in the light of the words
of the Church, "O happy fault," since it meant the incarnation and
redemption, the coming of our dear Lord Jesus Christ among us as man.

"It is given to men once to die, and then the judgment." If we say, any
of us, that we do not fear death, which we all must look forward to as a
certainty, then we are liars. But it is not death we are supposed to
fear, but the judgment, and live accordingly. Lent is the time to
consider these things.

The most comforting prayer for those who fear is that preface in the
Mass of the dead.

"It is truly meet and just, right and availing unto salvation that we
should at all times and in all places give thanks unto Thee, O Holy
Lord, Father almighty and everlasting God; through Christ our Lord. In
whom the hope of a blessed resurrection hath shone upon us, that those
whom the certainty of dying afflicteth, may be consoled by the promise
of future immortality. For unto Thy faithful, O Lord, life is changed,
not taken away; and the abode of this earthly sojourn being dissolved,
an eternal dwelling is prepared in heaven. And therefore with the angels
and archangels, with thrones and dominions, and with all the heavenly
hosts, we sing a hymn to Thy glory, saying without ceasing,

"Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts. Heaven and earth are full of Thy
glory. Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is he that cometh in the name of
the Lord. Hosanna in the Highest."
