% Charles O'Rourke - The Death of a Beloved Apostle
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1950, 1, 2.

*Summary: An obituary for a gentle Catholic Worker--Charles O'Rourke.
She notes his persistent work habits, generosity, attentiveness to all,
non-partisan demeanor, and praises him as a gentleman. (DDLW \#613).*

This last week Charles O'Rourke died and was buried. He had been in and
out of the hospital several times recently and was resting at Mott
street before going on a breathing spell to Maryfarm. Tom Sullivan also
had been ill, and in the hospital for a week, and the two of them set
out together last Thursday to catch the Hudson River Day Line to
Newburgh. We had a gala breakfast, what with two members of the staff
invalids, and Jack English shopped for English muffins and frozen
strawberries (much to Charles' amusement) while I poached some eggs and
poured out the coffee. Of course there were no strawberries, but the
English muffins were fancy enough. In our newly donated station wagon we
drove the invalids to the boat. It was a grey day, rather heavy and
warm, but the river is always beautiful. Agnes Bird was meeting them at
the boat.

They had a good day, I learned afterward, and Charles visited around the
farm and went to bed at ten-thirty. He and Tom were sharing Peter
Maurin's room. Charles woke up at three with another heart attack and
after a struggle for an hour to breathe, he died. Fr. Faley was with him
when he died and had just heard his confession. Tom was telephoning the
doctor at the moment.

Charles' family, his nephews and nieces took over then, the body was
brought to Arlington, New Jersey, where many of his relatives lived, and
he was buried from St. Stephen's Church. The Mass was sung by Fr.
Boyton, S.J., his boyhood friend. We went to the cemetery with him and
saw him laid to rest in his father's plot.

As one grows older, one wants to hear the details of the last days of
old friends. I put a death notice in the **Herald Tribune** and the
**Times**, and when I was telephoning it, saying how Charles had devoted
the last 15 years of his life to the poor, and that though he was a
lover of all beauty, he chose to spend his last years in ugly slums, the
girl who took the message exclaimed, "you sound as though you loved
him," and I could tell her that indeed we all loved him dearly.

In the notices I listed him as circulation manager of **The Catholic
Worker**. I was trying to speak in terms that people would understand.
Peter Maurin's indoctrination has affected more people in more ways than
they realize so that those who come to give themselves to the **Catholic
Worker** try to ask nothing for themselves. Beginning with doing without
a salary they do without a title also. He "just came in" some 16 years
ago, and began giving up his spare time when we began our work on
Fifteenth street. He came in to help.

He took such dry-as-dust jobs as taking care of the changes of address,
cancellations, new subscriptions, stencils, carding of contributions,
and so on. He worked faithfully, putting in long working days at this
desperately dull work. Then when he had caught up on all the loose ends,
he'd go back to his own work as construction engineer for a time and
we'd hear from him from Ohio, or further west. It was usually just a
quiet note and a large contribution from his salary. Just as we began to
get swamped again, he'd arrive on the scene and take up the work. He
never had his name listed on the mast head, he never put himself forward
in any way. He just gave what he had to give, and that was hard service,
and delicate companionship and consideration to those who needed it
around the office.

He loved poetry and opera and people and walking trips. He had been all
over the world, and there was no place you could mention but that
Charlie had been there. Only last week when we returned from our
pilgrimage to Our Lady of Mt. Carmel Church on 115th street, and were
boasting of our exploit of walking the entire distance from Canal street
and then waiting from 1:30 to 4 a.m. for Mass, fasting, Charles
mentioned that he had made pilgrimages to every church in New York
except one or two recent ones. He had been in Europe, he had been in
Asia.

He used to show up at odd times, too, when there was some crisis, and we
needed extra help desperately. During the seamen's strike in 1936-7 he
served every day, helping the coffee line there, in the headquarters we
set up on the west side, serving cheese and peanut butter sandwiches and
keeping the coffee on the stove from eight a.m. till midnight. One
Saturday afternoon when Charles and I were listening to the Valkyrie and
one of the strikers kept pushing the radio dial to the bop music of the
day, Charlie invited me to the opera so we could hear Flagstadt without
interruptions for the news or bop. From then on we took in an opera
every winter, standing on the main floor since even then he could not
take the stairs on account of his heart. He was a bit younger than
Peter, but no one could ever tell his age; he never seemed more than a
hefty fifty. Some said he had the glamor [sic] of a Ronald Coleman and
one of my Spanish relatives who came around called him the Colonial.

He was always immaculately dressed and even these last years when he
stayed at Mott street most of the time he never indicated he minded the
absence of bath or hot water, but tubbed as the rest of us did in the
sink, and continued to look immaculate.

We used to tease him in the early days of the work, saying he was
probably a government agent spying around for traitors. Our pacifism and
anarchism made us persecution-conscious. "You always show up to help at
the crucial moment," we told him, but since all times seem to have been
crucial times with the **Catholic Worker**, that didn't mean much. After
all there was always a war going on. We were opposing class war, race
war, the Ethiopian war, the Spanish war, the Chinese-Japanese war, the
World War, and now, as he lay ill, the Korean war. Charlie never called
himself a pacifist or an anarchist. "One of these days they'll round us
all up and put us in a concentration camp," I used to tell Charlie, "and
if they ask you to finally commit yourself, to take your stand, you'll
say, 'I just dropped in to help--some seventeen years ago.'"

When we made a duplicate mailing list and decided to hide it, we gave it
to Charlie to leave it with his family in Jersey and it's tucked away
there now somewhere, rather out of date, I'm afraid.

There was something godlike about Charlie, this large interest he showed
in everyone, this genial charity. He was kindly and friendly to all,
pacifist and militarist and to those who "just went," drafted in the
forces. He was never one to be dogmatic, to press his point on others.
He was silent, gentle, and one would be tempted to call him a rather
amused spectator of the goings on of the **Catholic Worker**, if he had
not worked so hard at the mailing list, to whom after all, our pacifist
literature was going out.

There was many a young fellow he befriended around the place and kept in
touch with for years after they left the Worker. I am thinking of one in
particular, a turbulent lad who had hitch-hiked all over the country and
was in a rather beaten state. He came to us from the south, travelling
in box cars, and Charlie read his poetry, encouraged him to write, was a
sympathetic friend when he fell in love. I can remember going with
Charles and Paul (my daughter was along, too) on a hot summer night to
sit on the steps of St. Vincent's hospital while we waited for Paul's
first child to be born. Charlie and Paul sat there and smoked, and every
now and then one or the other would go across the street to a candy
store to telephone for news. I can remember Tamar hopping around
impatient for her walk. She was a child herself then. When Charlie died
he had a letter from Paul in his pocket.

Much as Charlie loved people and was torn by that love to partisan
positions on occasion, he never let his feelings interfere with the work
he did for the movement. People came and went. There were occasional
explosions over ideas and positions and personalities, and people left
in a huff (always to make up afterward) but Charlie, though he took
sides where his affections lay, kept on working, grimly at times. Thank
God there were no tempests going on these last years, and that he left
the place in a generally peaceful state.

I don't think any of us underestimates the work that Charles O'Rourke
did with us all these years. But he, himself, kept his good humor about
it, and his fine perspective. We had been reading **The Gallery** that
last week of his life and commenting on the General in the censorship
division. "The whole war rested on the shoulders of that general in the
censor's office," someone said. "Like the **Catholic Worke**r revolves
around the stencils," Charlie added, picking up a pile of defective
stencils to replace.

He was in harness yet and he was not relinquishing the work because of
age or illness.

He took no dogmatic stands, but he loved the **Catholic Worker** and he
loved us as we did him and we are proud to have had such a gentleman
associated the last seventeen years of his life with us. As far as we
are concerned he has not really left us. For him, "life is changed, not
taken away." He has just gone on another journey.
