% On Pilgrimage - October 1950
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1950, 1, 2.

*Summary: Meditation on the myriad forms of community--in her writing,
their neighborhood, parish, the siants, guests, and in the many
nationalities they encounter. Quotes from Martin Buber and notes the
difficulties in all human associations. (DDLW \#615).*

The reason we write is to communicate ideas, and the reason for getting
out the Catholic Worker each month is to communicate with our brothers
(there are 63,000 subscribers and there may be many more readers). We
must overflow in writing about all the things we have been talking and
living during the month. Writing is an act of community. It is a letter,
it is comforting, consoling, helping, advising on our part, as well as
asking it on yours. It is a part of our human association with each
other. It is an expression of our love and concern for each other.

"If you have no will for human association, I tell you that you are
exposing civilization to the fate of dying in fearful agony," said
Pierre Leroux in 1848.

Essentially each one of us is alone, and that makes us first realize our
helplessness and then our need of each other and responsibility to each
other.

We have been living for fourteen years in a community in Mott street.
Every night as we said compline, we said "Visit O Lord this community!"
And we meant the street, the neighborhood, the two parishes we lived
between, the group where we felt ourselves at home, as once we felt
ourselves at home in our families, "felt ourselves approved, affirmed,
in our functional independence and responsibility."

It was a community of families, of small businesses, pushcarts,
bakeries, cheese factories, a decentralist neighborhood of Italians who
have a strong sense of family, of clan, of staying close to home in
their work. They worked long hours, but in a leisurely, even idle, way.
The shoemaker, the baker, the winestore dealer, the scungilli restaurant
family were at work before we went to Mass at eight, and they worked
late at night, but they had time to sit out during fiestas, to lunch
with their families each day, to live the life of the streets, playing
cards on the sidewalks, ball on the streets. They had the natural joys
of family and community, if not the joys of nature.

The vice of the city, the frittering away of money and time, the
idleness, the gambling, the sloth of the young as compared with the
diligence of the older generation -- all these were there, of course,
but also there was community in a way. (My sister-in-law has lived in an
apartment for seven years, and does not know a neighbor.) There was
mutual aid on Mott street. You could borrow money or food from
neighbors, you could wake them in the small hours in time of sickness,
there was an acceptance of the poor.

Yes, we will miss Mott street. Here on Chrystie street we are definitely
one parish, the Nativity, and our pastor, Fr. Doino, has already come to
bless the house. He is a man of this neighborhood, he grew up in the
parish of Our Lady of Loretto, and he knows the life of the Bowery, has
sympathy for the men. He has a big rambling parish here, after fourteen
years in the Philippines, and there is a shrine to our Lady of Lipa.
Every night there are devotions, and every morning one Mass follows
another, eight of them. Father Doino throws open his house to the needs
of the neighborhood, taking in the boys from the street, making a
playground of the small yard, using one of the parish halls for a crowd
of seventy-five unionists who were on strike for six months. They had
there a place where they could meet, cook their meals and discuss social
principles. And, of course, there are dances and bazaars, one of which
is going on right now. We are happy to be in this Jesuit parish, and
Father has been warm and friendly in every way, even to sending us over
a couple of alarm clocks so that we can get to Mass on time!

Over here at 223 Chrystie, we are closer to the Bowery than ever. There
was an interruption of only two days in the serving of the 500 or so who
come to get soup and coffee and bread, and that was due to the taking up
and reconnecting of stoves. We are nearer the women's lodging house
here. The Salvation Army Hotel on Rivington street is a spotless place,
and women can get a bed for thirty-five cents a night. We are a few
blocks from the men's municipal lodging house on Third street. There are
already Puerto Rican families coming in every day for clothes, there are
neighbors coming in for books. Some Jewish friends from the tenement
next door wanted to know if they could use the quiet of our library last
Sunday.

Here, within this great city of nine million people, we must, in this
neighborhood, on this street, in this parish, regain a sense of
community which is the basis for peace in the world. It is only so we
can oppose the State and the present ever-spreading war. We are not
represented by our so-called representatives. (The State, according to
Martin Buber, is an institution in which a virtually unorganized mass
allows its affairs to be conducted by "representation.")

Our representatives are the saints, the thinkers, uniting us in a
community of interest, in a human relationship in this world and the
next. And we have to work hard **in this world**, to begin our heaven
now, to make a heaven for others (it has been called Utopia), because
this is the teaching of the saints.

All the way to heaven is heaven, because Christ said, I am the Way. St.
Catherine of Sienna said this. We are to be Christ to each other, and
see Christ in each other, and so we will love one another. "And for
these there is no law," in the legal worldly sense, but only "the
liberty of Christ." This is what we mean by our philosophical anarchism.

Our representative leaders, thinkers and strugglers are such men as St.
Vincent de Paul, St. Francis, Gandhi, Tolstoi, and such writers as Baron
von Hugel and Dr. Martin Buber, two thinkers whose books I am reading
right now.

Martin Buber
------------

In many ways Dr. Buber, who is professor of sociology at the Hebrew
university in Jerusalem, reminds me of Peter Maurin in his
interpretation of history and his view of the future.

When there was a dispute in our midst and Peter was called upon to judge
or take sides, he used to give us a lecture on the art of human
contacts. Here is a paragraph from Buber, page 141 of his **Paths to
Utopia**, which is pertinent to our work. He was writing of the early
efforts to build up village communes in Palestine and how the new
problem of persecution and immigration overwhelmed the early pioneers
with a vast tide of new workers, many of whom did not have the same
ideals. It reminded me of how Peter, in the years 1933-1939, was always
dealing with the problem of unemployment and poverty, and how the coming
of world war two meant that we had not the unemployed to build up Houses
of Hospitality and farming communes and be weaned away from the wage
system by a restoration of the communal principles of Christianity as
applied to the laity and to families; but we had the **unemployables**.
There was always the problem of scholar-worker relationship to deal with
as a result. Martin Buber writes:

"The point where the problem emerges is neither the individual's
relationship to the idea nor his relationship to the community, nor yet
to workâ€¦The point where the problem emerges, where people are apt to
slip is in their relationship with their fellows. By this I do not mean
the question, much discussed in its day, of the intimacy that exists in
the small and the loss of this intimacy in the big village communes. I
mean something which has nothing whatever to do with the size of the
commune. It is not a matter of intimacy at all; this appears when it
must, and if it is lacking, that's all there is to it. The question is
rather one of openness. A real community need not consist of people who
are perpetually together; but it must consist of people who, precisely
because they are comrades, have mutual access to one another and are
ready for one another. A real community is one which in every point of
its being possesses, potentially at least, the whole character of
community. The internal questions of a community are thus in reality
questions relating to its own genuineness, hence to its inner strength
and stability."

There is this sense of community amongst us all because we are
Catholics, for instance and have a common faith. It does not matter that
some are pacifists and some not. In one sense we are all pacifists, in
the sense that we do not believe in class war, race war, any compulsion
and coercion between human beings to compel them to go this way or that.
We all recognize the pacifism of the saints, of whom it is said that one
sign of perfection is not to see the imperfections of others. And in our
Houses of Hospitality and farms throughout the country, and among the
families that have lived and been associated with **The Catholic
Worker** in the past, there is still and always this sense of community.
To know that Katherine Reser is having another baby, that Al is doing
well with his trucking business, that Martie Paul on the Holy Family
farm is managing to handle things and keep on in the struggle on that
front, and to hear that the **Pio Decimo** press has a new center for
meetings in Monsignor Hellriegel's parish, -- all these things warm the
heart, and in these centers and families, Catholic and non Catholic,
every nationality meet together in their common humanity, children of
one God whether that God is acknowledged or not. There are many sheep
whose shepherds have not feed them these days and who are bitter in
their hunger for truth.

Indo-Chinese
------------

At Maryfarm, Newburgh, there were seven Indo-Chinese meeting together at
a retreat this past month. They were all exchange students and were
getting together before going back to school. They were Viet-Namese and
undoubtedly in their upholding the principles of autonomy, have been
accused of communism in their struggle against the imperialism of
France.

Down at the Peter Maurin farm we have had a Jew from Israel as a guest
and a young Italian discharged from the army for nervous trouble. I
mentioned in previous **Catholic Worker's** that we bought our present
home from a Korean family. Constantly in our daily lives we are in touch
with our brothers from all parts of the world and we feel ever more and
more that truth Dr. Buber brings out:

"The point where the problem emerges is neither the individual's
relationship to the idea nor his relationship to the community, nor yet
to work. The point where the problem emerges, where people are apt to
slip, is in their relationship with their fellows."

St. John on Patmos simplified the whole law --

"My little children, let us love one another."
