% On Pilgrimage - June 1951
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1951, 1, 2.

*Summary: Describes visiting the Tombs prison, the waiting, noise,
anger. Berates herself for getting angry at guests who are a trial. Asks
how to blend charity and the common good. Finally says "the secret is to
take what comes." (DDLW \#622).*

It is June first. Our front windows look out on a wide street where
trucks and cars speed by all day. Every now and then there is the
sickening scream of brakes. Houston Street from which we are separated
only by the sidewall of a theatre and a narrow vacant lot is one of the
main crosstown streets so that the intersection of Chrystie, which
becomes Second Avenue at this corner, is one of the busiest. But this is
not just a bare vehicular street like Canal Street with never a spot of
color to temper its brazen expanse. Across the street from us is Sara
Delano Roosevelt Park where there used to be long solid blocks of
tenements. Here are cool shaded walks in the alleys made by the
overhanging branches of the sycamore trees. Privet hedges line the
walks. In the center are sunken playgrounds for the children, with
swings, slides, see-saws, basketball courts and plenty of room for
roller skating and bicycling.

Last night I met Marge Hughes over in the park with her four children
and we had a picnic of Italian sandwiches and pickles and cake. The
children ate the pickles and cake of course, but even that soft fare was
enough to make Tommy lose another tooth. It is too hot to eat these last
two days. A haze hangs over the streets, even at seven in the morning.

Yesterday morning I went down to the Tombs to visit a prisoner and found
myself one of a long line of women and children, colored and white.
Visiting hours are from nine until eleven thirty, and batches of
visitors go in every half hour. While you wait you can sit in a
comfortable waiting room rather like that of a clinic, only bars are
much in evidence, bars separating you from the wardens who take any
parcels or money which you may wish to leave for a prisoner. When you go
in you must go to one of two high desks where the police officers are
checking visitors, one a woman, and tell your business, who the prisoner
is, what is your relationship to him, why you wish to see him and so on.
Then you are given a slip with the name of the prisoner on it and told
to go next door and get the number of the floor the prisoner is on. Then
you return, get another slip and are told to wait until the next group
of visitors goes upstairs. Every half hour one crowd streams out and
another line enters, going up a flight of stairs, past iron bars.

I had visited many jails before and the one at San Quentin was the most
human. There I sat at a desk facing the prisoner and was able to enjoy a
conversation with Tom Mooney. Down at Trenton penitentiary there was so
ugly a system (one had to shout through a tiny aperture in a room full
of other shouting people) that the man we came to visit asked us to
write him letters instead. (It is the crucifix he carved which hangs in
our chapel at Peter Maurin Farm in Staten Island.)

The Tombs is a model prison so I expected better accommodations for
visitors. What I found was a series of long halls with steel walls
divided up into what looks like a row of open telephone booths. At eye
level there is a heavy pane of glass not large enough to see more than
part of the face of the man you are speaking to, and as I walked the
length of the hall it was strange to see glimpses of foreheads, ears,
eyes, noses, like Dada pictures hanging in an art gallery, all the same
size, the same height. I was curiously peering into each pane of glass
looking for my prisoner, since the number which had been given me had
been taken by someone else.

There were telephones in each booth so it was easy to carry on a
conversation even in the face of the other twenty five tete a tetes
going on in the length of the room. The woman next to me was saying,
"You've got to stand it. Six months isn't long." And the man facing me
was saying, "You've got to get me out of this." Probably all the
conversations were alike, there and in all the visiting rooms of all the
jails in the country.

There is so little one can do but listen. It is so hard to say that one
can do nothing. It is so easy to take the responsibility to pass the job
on to someone else. To be charitable and say "Yes, we will take you in,"
when it means that someone else will have to bear the brunt of the
difficulty at Peter Maurin Farm, at Maryfarm or at St. Joseph's house.
It is hard to say no. It is hard to say it kindly, and not become
angered by the threats, the blusterings, the recriminations of the
person refused.

Anger is the opposite of love and I'm afraid I was tempted to anger
several other times yesterday as I had to deal with a Sairey Gamp around
here and a half nude drunken woman who comes in and out, staying just
long enough to rest before going out on another pan handling tour along
the Bowery. What to do? Bellevue refuses such cases and even when they
are taken in on the alcohol ward they are released next day. Police do
not want the bother of appearing in court against them and so do not
pick them up and put them in the safe keeping of a jail until they
recover somewhat. The House of the Good Shepherd takes only court cases
so women cannot find refuge there. St. Zita's does not take them. Where
can they go? They all feel they can come here, so here they are. If you
lock the door they come in the window. They wander in through the
basement door at any hour of the day, and you find them in one of the
beds belonging to one of the other women, and going out again dressed in
clothes belonging to one of the other women. You think about the common
good and resolve that you must be firm and keep such nuisances out. Then
you suddenly remember that tragic line--"It is better that one man
perish than the whole nation perish."

And so the merrigoround continues. Charity and the common good.

Well, there they are and there is nothing to do, once they have a
foothold. When other women come and ask for a bed, you just have to say,
"We have so large and disorderly a family now we can take on no more. We
have reached the saturation point." The sad thing is that when out of
town visitors come there is no bed for them unless you fill up the floor
space with mattresses.

And then, happy day, someone gets a job, or some relative comes and find
another and insists on taking her home; or unhappy day, they go to the
hospital for a long stay. Then there are a few empty beds and then your
trial begins again. For much as you love your brother and sister, you
feel the gnawing suspicion as you speak to them, "Are you going to break
out on us, nice as you look now? Or just what particular kind of trial
are you going to be?" Cut off the head of one tyrant and six others
spring up in their place. Ah me! I am full of suspicion and anger and
lack of brotherly love!

However, God sends us what He wants to send us and He sends us treasures
too, and the bread gets kneaded and baked and clothes are given out and
hundreds of meals are put on the table, and the dishes get washed, and
right now the back yard is being cleaned out for our first back yard
meeting this year. Fr. D'Arcy is to speak, and instead of being crowded
in our library and peering in the doors and windows we will sit around
our spacious yard which is separated by walls from two other yards, and
from a tenement and an old Church. That old Church used to be the Greek
Orthodox Cathedral but now it is a dance hall and a banquet hall and
every Friday and Saturday night we hear music and laughter until the
small hours.

Yes, the secret is to take what comes; whether it is a Fr. D'Arcy
speaking on the mind and heart of love, or a Sairey Gamp. Easier said
than done, since life isn't reading a book or listening to a lecture,
but living with people whom you love and over whom you grieve.

Hospital
--------

And yesterday too I visited Joe Monroe who is in the t.b. ward of
Willard Parker Hospital with fluid on the lungs. Bed rest is prescribed.
We miss him so much. But thank God he is near enough so that the bus on
the corner takes us almost to the door and visiting hours are Tuesday,
Thursday and Sunday, and Bob and Tony and Lewis were also there
yesterday, helping eat the candy they brought and enjoying a good
gossip. In the next bed was another former CW, a man who had been in the
house with us some time ago.
