% Love and Justice
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1952, 1, 2.

*Summary: Asserts that action for social and racial justice must flow
from reverence for those in need and the precept of love. Says ". If we
are afraid, we must pray not to be afraid, to be fools for Christ."
(DDLW \#635).*

There has been a steel strike for over a month, and Ritas Ham went over
to Harrison, N.J., to draw pictures of steel mills and closed gates and
pickets. The sketches were as good as Goya or Louisa Lozowick. She draws
men and women sitting around the library, with compassion and truth.
Victims of an industrial system.

Bob Ludlow, Michael Harrington and Roger and Dick and Martin have been
out on picket lines to call attention to the regime of repression and
injustice which still endures in Spain. There have been meetings, talk,
study. A vast program of civil disobedience has been set going in South
Africa, and our sympathy, and aid in any from we can give it, must be
with these African brothers of ours.

And friends write to remind us, thinking we forget, that but one thing
is necessary, love, and "seek ye first the kingdom of heaven."

All action springs from love. That was what Dante said. "Our God is a
consuming fire," St. Paul said. One is driven, when one loves, to ways
of expressing that love, to physical expressions of love, to a desire
for union with others, and this love may find its expression in picket
lines, in articles and speeches, crying out against injustice,
destitution and violence. It is a work of mercy to rebuke the sinner, to
comfort the afflicted, to enlighten the ignorant. We must choose what
means we can, and they must be pure means.

St. Paul wrote, "Know ye not that you are the temple of God and that the
Spirit of God dwelleth in you? But if any man violate the temple of God,
him shall god destroy. For the temple of God is holy, which you are."
What reverence we must have for our brothers, for the bodies of our
brothers, and what consuming care we should have that they receive what
is needful, that they not be exploited.

As for ourselves, yes, we must be meek, bear injustice, malice, rash
judgment. We must turn the other cheek, give up our cloak, go a second
mile.

A recent Communist pamphlet says, "Religion has not ceased to be a
harmful and reactionary ideology since it attempts to inculcate
contemptuous attitudes towards all that is earthly, and by token
distracts from the building of Communism…The preaching of the life
beyond the grave and the summons to take thought only for the saving of
one's soul are radically hostile to Soviet concepts. Faith in life
beyond the grave vitiates the believer ideologically, develops in him a
feeling of extreme individualism and paralyzes his will in the struggle
for Communism."

We are afraid this is often true in the struggle for social and racial
justice. The old I.W.W. song, "You'll get pie in the sky when you die,"
is too often the comfort of the Christian. We hug to ourselves, "After
all, God will make it up to them, 'He will throw down the mighty from
their seats and the rich he will send empty away…He will fill the hungry
with good things.' And we do nothing, or do little, and leave the rest
up to God.

But the crisis is urgent. The Holy father cries out to rouse Christians
from their lethargy. There are stirring calls from the Australian and
French hierarchy, to name but a few pastoral letters.

We know that we can do little, but we must resolve to do all. To give
ourselves completely, without reserve, to offer ourselves, to be willing
to lay down our lives for our brothers. We must pray to want to. We must
pray to become men of desires, and those desires will overflow into
action.

It is not a counsel of perfection--this call to love. "A new precept I
give unto you, to the laying down of one's life for his friend." This
was a physical fact in Christ's life and should be a physical fact in
our own. If we are afraid, we must pray not to be afraid, to be fools
for Christ. Love includes justice.
