% On Pilgrimage - 1954
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1954, 2, 6.

*Summary: While convalescing she quotes the recently ill Pope on illness
and suffering. Tells of being cared for, the life of the house, and the
inadequate housing of Tamar's family. (DDLW \#661).*

Last month, the Holy Father said to me, as he said to all who are sick,
"I have thought of you, beloved ailing sons and daughters, with
particular right among those who are closest to our Spirit and pressed
to our heart."

The Holy Father himself was sick, and with what warmth and tenderness he
spoke to the suffering. My ailments were slight but painful. I was in
the hospital when I read General Dean's story of his imprisonment and
suffering in Korea, and I thought of the anguish of the world, and what
a tiny drop mine was in the ocean of pain. There were many refugee
doctors in the hospital where I was, and one of them said to me when I
spoke of how the body seemed to overcome the spirit,. "Oh, it is only
for about three weeks! After that one becomes more used to it, and the
spirit takes hold again!" Her husband bears the scars on his body of his
days in a concentration camp.

The Holy Father called the sick, and now that I am recovered I can no
longer be in that noble company, "the precious jewels of the Church, and
valid sources of spiritual energies," on whom he relies this year to
obtain "help for humanity and the Church itself."

He speaks, he tells them, thanks to the radio, to all of them,
languishing in hospitals, great and small, in sanitoriums, in clinics,
in hospices, in prisons, in barracks, in the desolate garrets of the
most poor, in the divided little rooms of your homes."

"Children with pallid faces like flowers growing without the warmth of
the sun" (we think of the Puerto Ricans and Negroes in our slums and of
little Bryan Murphy in Detroit "youth whose rare smiles express the
strength of the soul rather than the freshness of your years" (we think
of the wounded in our veterans hospitals, in prison camps throughout the
world) "mature men bitterly removed from your proper dynamism" (and with
all the others we think of Ed Willock and what he has meant to us all
with his speaking, writing, drawing, building) "old people, to whom
natural fatigue, disease adds discomforts and sufferings."

"We have always supplicated Jesus to make our hearts in some manner
similar to His; a God heart, a kind heart, a heart open to all
sufferings, and to all sorrows."

We are grateful indeed to the Holy Father, and we know that through
these desires, these prayers, such news as that which we print this
month of what is happening in Russian labor camps is made possible. May
God bless him and keep him with us many more years.

The Sick in the House
---

When I came home from the hospital to St. Joseph's house on Chrystie
Street I was filled with gratitude for having a house of hospitality to
come to. We were one of those hospices the Holy Father was praying for.
Up on the top floor Nelly Lampkin, as she told me her name was once
years ago, tho she is generally known as Nelly Post, is failing. She is
over eighty and for many years "has lived on the Bowery. She was one of
the sights at Sammy's Bowery Night Club (it is hard to see Jesus in such
people as go slumming in such a night club, enjoying the wrecks around
them) and she was in and out of our hospice for many years. A few years
ago she came home for good, and was anointed only to go out again with
fresh vigor. Now she cannot leave her bed, though she tries to keep
bright. When she got news of Tom's leaving for Paris she said pertly,
"Now he'll be finding another little lady and forget all about me." She
weighs about sixty pounds and when she had to go up to Bellevue recently
for a treatment, Isidore could easily carry her up and down the four
flights of stairs. *(P.S. Nellie died a week after this was written.)*

Room Service
---

The two top floors on the south side of the double house are for women,
and the floor below for men, as well as the three floors on the other
side. Mr. Murphy sits in dignified splendor on the floor below, with a
potted plant, a radio, a colorful spread and usually a tray in front of
him. Veronica serves him not only his meals, but mid-morning and
mid-afternoon and before going to bed, tea or coffee or milk, and rolls,
buns, cakes, toast.

I told him as I passed that I was taking a turn to be sick, and that he
had better get back down to the kitchen again and replace Chu and
Shorty, but he paid no attention to me. Natty is the one who curtains
the entire house, and she surely makes the rooms of the sick cheerful
with bright colors and drapes that are rich and gorgeous. I caught her
hanging a brocaded curtain in Bob Ludlow's room once that was too
elegant for any bedroom, and took it from her for the chapel at Peter
Maurin Farm. Just before Tom got back home he was down in his room,
washing windows and hanging clean sash curtains and drapes as homecoming
present.

Comings and Goings
---

Reference to Bob Ludlow necessitates comment on the sad news that Bob's
taking a leave of absence for a year. He cheerfully refuses to look
ahead a year and tell us what he intends to do, but I shall go to his
new home on Forsythe Street, two rooms for fifteen a month, and drag him
back by the hair of the head, come next February, God willing.

We do indeed get reconciled to the comings and goings, because we always
feel assured that we never lose these friends and associates. They come
back, over and over, even when they have gone on to work which is more
suitable to their talents, to fields which are richer and more varied
than the work we have.

One visitor we had last month was Gerry Griffin, who is finishing his
course at the Pennsylvania General Hospital in a few months and is going
to the near east to work among the Syrians, with whom he fell in love
when he did hospital service there during the war. With that end in
view, he is studying Arabic, and I hope he is reading Doughty's "Arabia
Deserta," which I recommended to him when he was here.

The Good Food
---

Convalescence means a great appreciation of food. Just when you hope
that you have become involuntarily mortified, there is a tremendous
upsurge of appetite. Thanks to Chu and Shorty and Roger, meals were as
good as anything served in the Waldorf. It results in great energy,
which means that I was downstairs taking care of the office again by the
middle of the month, in the old familiar surroundings of Puerto Rican
children running in and out for clothes, mothers and babies, men
shambling in, seeking shelter, shirts, sweaters, socks; visitors
bringing food, shirts, sweaters and socks, but, unfortunately, not that
which is most necessary these days--shelter.

Car Owner
---

A man came in one night, huge, stalwart, who said he had his wife and
six children outside in a car and he, too, had been refused shelter.
Michael, who was answering the men who came in during that particular
hour asked him why. "As long as you have any money in your pocket, or a
car, they won't take you," he said. "That sounded reasonable," Michael
commented. "But you can't get around without a car," the man complained.
Besides, if I sold it, I'd only get about $25 for it." Nevertheless,
$25 would pay for shelter for a while. "And what kind," he retorted
bitterly. "Two rooms for my wife and kids. How can a family live?" But
he went back to the shelter, telling them that he would sell the car.

Fire Is Twice Bread
---

I groan to myself very often about the inadequacy of Tamar and David's
shelter, four rooms and attic with six children. There are two bedrooms
and a hall, a living room and kitchen and bath on one floor. The two
littlest sleep down stairs, and the four oldest in the attic, which this
year was finished off into one big room, and one small room for David's
books. What would be nice, and is fun contemplating, is a house with big
rooms with southern exposure for plants, because Tamar has a green
thumb, and her African violet and begonias and geraniums are dreams of
beauty in three of the windows. There should be a real library to hold
all the books, pamphlets, magazines and pictures which clutter up the
entire house as well as the attic back room. There should be a sewing
room for Tamar's loom, spinning wheels, hooked rug frame, sewing
machine, and other home industries like carpentry she delights in as
well as Eric. She can make marvelous rag animals and she has taught the
girls to knit. She hates housework, but she loves to cook, so the
kitchen should be bigger. She loves to wash, too, but that now has to
take place in the bathroom, which makes a fearful muddle of that. All
activity takes place in two small rooms, but thank God they are warm and
snug. After listening to Tom Sullivan's tales of the cold of Europe, I
do thank God with all my heart for our warmth here. "Fire is twice
bread" was a famous Arabic saying, according to Doughty, and I can well
believe it. And as for space, I once read a wonderful book called **The
Family**, by Federova, all about a group of Russian refugees who rented
all their rooms and slept on and under the tables as well as in the
beds. To be crowded is often to be warm, and if to to be crowded also
means more fights among children, which all mothers complain about,
well, Stanley has a Lithuanian proverb which says, "It is better to
fight than to be lonely."
