% Are The Leaders Insane?
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1954, 1, 6.

*Summary: Passionate condemnation of the hydrogen bomb tests and
industrial preparation of nerve gas for war. Upholds the supremacy of
conscience and challenges each person to resist as they are able. Quotes
spiritual writers in an effort to strengthen her faith and reduce fear.
(DDLW \#664).*

When the Lord washed the feet of his apostles on Holy Thursday, St.
Peter, head of the Church, questioned Him, "Lord, is it for Thee to wash
my feet?" That question is always being asked. He knew how hard it was
for us to understand it. "Do you understand what it is I have done to
you? You hail me as master and indeed I amâ€¦if I have washed your feet, I
who am the Master and the Lord, you in your turn ought to wash each
other's feet."

City of God
-----------

St. Augustine in his **City of God** says that God never intended man to
dominate his fellows. He was to dominate the beasts of the field, the
fowls of the air, what crawled upon the earth, but men were not to
dominate each other. He preferred shepherds to kings. It was man himself
who insisted on having a worldly king though he was warned what would
happen to him. God allowed the prophets to anoint the kings and once men
had accepted their kings they were supposed to show them respect, to
obey the authority they had set up. To obey, that is, in all that did
not go against their conscience. St. Peter was ordered by lawful
authority not to preach in the name of Jesus, and he said he had to obey
God rather than man, and he left prison to go out again to the market
place and preach the Gospel. Over and over again, men had to disobey
lawful authority to follow the voice of their conscience.

This obedience to God and disobedience to the State has over and over
again happened through history.

It is time again to cry out against our "leaders," to question whether
or not, since it is not for us to say that they are evil men, they are
sane men.

On Laetare Sunday, a day of rejoicing in the midst of a season of
penance, three stories in The New York Times caught my eye. On the first
page of the news of the week in review, there is an account of the "new
alarm" throughout the world over the setting off of another hydrogen
bomb in the Pacific. The President said of this latest test:

Quite Clear
-----------

"It was quite clear that this time something must have happened that we
had never experienced before, and must have surprised and astonished the
scientists."

It is decided that we must learn more about it, so a film will be
released on April 7^th^ which will show the tests being made. Russia,
too, is releasing data about her hydrogen bombs. She has given detailed
reports and compared the force of the explosion to the million ton
meteor that blasted more than a hundred square miles of forest in
Siberia in 1908.

Both Russia and America warn that the use of these weapons will wipe out
civilization. Those who are caught in the middle, all those lands on
which we have placed our air bases, including England, look upon this
arms race with horror. Russia's foothold in Guatemala is one base of a
sort, compared to the innumerable bases we have around the world.

Television, radio and press have given accounts of the poor fishermen
who were showered with dust from the last atomic explosion and are now
suffering the consequences.

There is "an ebbing of hopes for the long standing problem of the Suez,"
there is "furore over Scorpion Pass," there is the terrible war in
Indo-China for which we are paying from 60 to 80 per cent of the costs.
There is bitterness in France towards us for paying with money, while
they pay with human lives for their last outpost of empire.

On the last page of the first section of the Times, there is a
column-long story of Denver's place in our war preparations, with the
heading, Denver Calmed on War Gas Fear.

Deadly Gas

The description of the manufacture of this deadly gas and how it kills
in four minutes of frightful agony is told in detail. "The arsenal
produces this weapon 24 hours a day, seven days a week." I wonder how
many are working in this plant, and have been working in it in the last
fourteen years. Until this GB, as it is called, was declassified by the
army last week, most workers did not know what they were making. Will we
be forgiven for our ignorance?

Increase Production
-------------------

Some projects include the filling of mustard gas shells, an assembly
line for incendiary bombs that make World War II napalm obsolete. The
army plans to increase the arsenal production from sixty million to
ninety million beginning June first. The arsenal was built in 1942 and
produced the jellied gasoline incendiary bombs that "burned out the
heart of the Japanese industrial area long before the atomic bomb
explosion." On March 10, 1945, Guam-based B 29's dropped 1,500 tons of
Denver made incendiary bombs on Tokyo. About 83,000 persons were killed
and an estimated 41,000 injured. More than half of Tokyo was destroyed
in that raid with more than a million made homeless." Besides Tokyo 69
other enemy cities were attacked with these bombs.

Are we frightening ourselves to death?
--------------------------------------

Lewis Mumford in a column long letter on the editorial page of the Times
strongly condemns the leaders of the country for their secrecy in regard
to these horrible weapons, with the faith that once known, the people
themselves will revolt against this madness. He is afraid that at a
given moment our self-induced fears will pull the trigger that will
start the destruction of civilization around the world.

Are there not enough Americans still possessed of sanity, he asks, who
will call a stop to the irrational decisions which are automatically
bringing us close to total catastrophe? And he points out: "There are
many alternative courses to the policy to which we have committed
ourselves practically without debate. The worst of all these
alternatives, submission to Communist totalitarianism, would still be
far wiser than the final destruction of civilization.

"As for the best of these alternatives, a policy of working firmly for justice and cooperation, and free intercourse with all other peoples, in the faith that love begets love as surely as hatred begets hatred, would in all probability, be the one instrument capable of piercing the strong political armor of our present enemies.

Mass Suicide
---

"Once the facts of our policy of total extermination are publicly
canvassed, and the final outcome, mass suicide is faced, I believe that
the American people are still sane enough to come to a wiser decision
than our government has yet made. They will realize that retaliation is
no protection; that total extermination of both sides is not victory;
that a constant state of morbid fear, suspicion and hatred is not
security; that in short what seems like unlimited power has become
impotence."

Let us deal with our own massive sins, he cries out and he concludes
that if as a nation we have become mad, it is time for the world to take
note of that madness, and he asks that the voice of the sane be heard
again in the land.

Prosperity
----------

And yet how can that voice be heard when the Denver story listing all
the defense plants which are bringing prosperity to Colorado, says "the
uneasiness of some in the Denver area about the nerve gas does not
affect Colorado's enthusiasm for the part it can play in what President
Eisenhower has called "the 'the new look.' "

How Rejoice?
------------

And yet in the face of these accounts we are told by St. Paul to rejoice
and to rejoice always. Fr. Henri de Lubac, the great French Jesuit,
wrote in his **Drama of Atheist Humanism,** "So long as we talk and argue
and busy ourselves on the plane of this world, evil seems to be
stronger. More than that, whether evil distresses us or whether we exalt
it, it alone seems real. The thing to do is to enter upon another plane,
to find that fourth dimension which represents the kingdom of the
spirit. Then freedom is queen, then God triumphs and man with him."

Worst Happened
--------------

My favorite quotation from Juliana of Norwich is her reassurance that
the worst has already happened and has been remedied--that is the Fall
of man, and his redemption by Christ. Looked at in the light of eternity
we have nothing to fear.

But it is not so easy to separate the city of God and the city of this
world. It is not so easy for a mother and father of a young and growing
family to face them around the supper table and contemplate only fear
and suffering for them in the time to come. It is all very well to say
we must go to the source of all strength, to drink at the living
fountain of Christ, but can we go from that fount of Love to a factory
where nerve gas and incendiary bombs are manufactured?

When we have talked of a general strike it is of such work and of such
evil that we are thinking; when we talk of non-payment of taxes it is of
the money which is going to Indo-China in the form of these incendiary
bombs and the planes to drop them that we are thinking. It is not thus
that we can love God and our brother; it is not in this way that we can
love our enemy.

People Need Disturbing
----------------------

When it is said that we disturb people too much by the words pacifism
and anarchism, I can only think that people need to be disturbed, that
their consciences need to be aroused, that they do indeed need to look
into their work, and study new techniques of love and poverty and
suffering for each other. Of course the remedies are drastic, but then
too the evil is a terrible one and we are all involved, we are all
guilty, and most certainly we are all going to suffer. The fact that we
have "the faith," that we go to the sacraments, is not enough. "Inasmuch
as ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
unto me" with napalm, nerve gas, our hydrogen bomb, our "new look."

Each one of us must make our decisions as to what he should do, each one
must examine his conscience and beg God for strength. Should one
register for the draft? Should one accept conscientious objector status
in the army or out of it, taking advantage of the exceptions allowed,
but accepting the fact of the draft? Should one pay tax which supports
this gigantic program?

I realize how difficult this is to decide. If one is unmarried and
strong physically, it is easier to make a decision to do only day labor
or work without pay. But there are many whose mental and physical
strength is not equal to this decision and there is a withholding tax
taken from even the smallest salary. Sometimes one can only make a
gesture of protest. It is not for any one to judge his fellow man on how
far he can go in resisting participation in preparation for war. In the
very works of mercy which we are performing, we at the Catholic Worker
are being aided by those who earn what they do only because they pay
income tax for war. Oh yes, the editors of **The Catholic Worker** know
only too well how far we too are involved in the city of this world.
Perhaps Bob Ludlow, who left us much against our will, felt that he was
being more honest in permitting a withholding tax to be taken from his
meager wage as hospital attendant that working for nothing for the
Catholic Worker. Who knows the heart of another? The temptation is
always there to go out on one's own, to walk the lone path of a St.
Francis rather than the community way of a St. Benedict.

All Involved
------------

I write thus frankly to let our readers know that we realize that we are
all involved, that we are not trying to place on the shoulders of others
the heavy burdens of knowledge and responsibility and are not bearing
them ourselves. This is the greatest of problems today, this problem of
war and peace, and involves every man, woman and child in the country.
It is a bigger problem by far than Senator McCarthy, than Guatemala,
than Puerto Rico and the recession. We are one world and all men are
brothers. We must pray to learn to love, to have faith in love.

Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief; take away my heart of stone and
give me a heart of flesh; in thee have I hoped, let me never be
confounded.
