% Death in August - Vito Marcantonio
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1954, 1, 6.

*Summary: A testament of Vito Marcantonio's political work with the
poor. Seen as a Communist sympathizer, he is denied a Church burial. She
says he lived Matthew 25 and did the works of mercy. Keywords: obituary
(DDLW \#674).*

Even so early in August the sycamore trees were shedding their leaves,
and that was a windy night, with little whirlpools of leaves and bits of
paper and dust whirling in the streets. Every now and then there was a
gust of rain.

Driving up First Avenue to East Harlem, I soon passed the neighborhoods
where there were trees and by the time we reached the funeral parlor we
were in the desolate regions of the uptown slums, huge gas tanks,
five-story tenements and filthy gutters where children played, darting
out between long hedges of parked cars.

Vito Marcantonio was laid out there surrounded by four walls of flowers
towering over the long lines of people – the poor, who came to pay their
respects. There was Negro, Puerto Ricans, Italians, the Puerto Ricans in
gypsy-like color and the Italians in black. In the center of the bank of
flowers, against one of the walls, sat a little wisp of a woman,
Angelina, his mother, surrounded by sympathizing and mourning friends.

They were of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel's parish, around the corner, where
we had made pilgrimages these last few years. It is a shine beloved by
the Italian of the city, who walk barefoot from all over Brooklyn, the
Bronx, and Manhattan, to attend one of the Masses which continue from
midnight of her feast until noon the next day. Many of us from The
Catholic Worker have made this pilgrimage, waiting in lines which
extended around the block for three and four hours to get to Mass, and
coming home at dawn to find our own neighborhood poor lying in rows on
the sidewalk in front of St. Joseph's House and against the old theater
building on the corner, waiting for their breakfast. The streets around
115th St. were blazing with lights during the festa and the push carts
were piled high with delicacies to eat and candles to burn before the
shrine. But on this night of somber pilgrimage, there were no lights, no
festive spirit but one of mourning.

Vito Marcantonio dropped dead of a heart attack near his office in the
vicinity of City Hall, during a drenching rain, and lay there while the
police and the priest were called. The priest came from St. Andrew's
Church and gave him conditional absolution and extreme unction. He had
the last sacrament of the Church. When he died he was carrying on his
person a rosary and a crucifix. It is not as though he had known he was
going to die. He was a young man yet, as ages go these days, in his
early fifties, and he probably felt he had years of work ahead of him.
He carried a rosary and a crucifix, but he was not on good terms with
the Church. He called himself a Catholic, and doubtless was, but he
followed "the Party line," and it was the communists who supported him
in his campaigns as he supported them so often in the positions he took,
the legislation he backed or opposed in Congress, to which he had been
elected so many times. If he were a communist, which he denied, one
could say we had one Communist in Congress. A fearsome thing! Enough to
set off another McCarthy oration on God and country! Reminding one of
the brave FBI man who displayed his gun-packed holster under his arm, as
he interviewed us women and children at Peter Maurin farm some months
ago about a Catholic conscientious objector. A fearful country we have
become with the frightful outcry we have let loose, the outlawing of the
Communist party, and of anyone who ever took the same position it did in
regard to labor, race relations, free speech, housing, relief, and so
on.

Of course one might have asked Marcantonio, "Why were you against the
war against Hitler until he invaded Russia?" Of course there are all
sorts of other embarrassing questions one might ask. It was these things
the Chancery office had in mind when it refused him Catholic burial from
his parish church of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel. But for a generation which
has put the adventures of Don Camillo on its best seller list, and has
laughed warm-heartedly at the adventures of the parish priest and the
communist mayor of a little Italian town, it was a hard-to-explain
action. Maybe none of the priests there have had time to read that
bright piece of fiction. But I am sure they sweated over that decision
which they felt it necessary to make, and grieved in their hearts over
it and felt that it was the only thing they could do, considering that
Marcantonio always seemed to flout Holy Mother Church whom they loved.
But I still can't help wondering about that rosary and crucifix. He
didn't change them from one pants pocket to another, on that rainy
summer Monday morning, saying, "If I drop dead I'd better have a rosary
and a crucifix in my pocket. It will look well for my party." He was not
even a member of the American Labor Party any more, saying it was
communist dominated here in New York, though he was running for the
House of Representatives again this fall on another ticket.

The thing that we will remember Vito Marcantonio for was "he understood
concerning the needy and the poor." The Psalmist said, "Blessed is he
who understands concerning the needy and the poor." I can't help
thinking of the rich man who sat at the table and feasted sumptuously,
and the poor man at the gate, starving, covered with sores, a repulsive
looking sight in all likelihood. They might even have been wine sores,
such as we see so often on men of the Bowery, which are so casually and
unsympathetically dismissed. "Why don't you go to the Gouveneur Hospital
clinic (that's your district), and let them look after those sores of
yours, instead of letting the dogs lick them in that horrible manner?
The Municipal Lodging House is on Second Street, right off the Bowery –
you can get a handout there, if you form in line and get a ticket. No
bums allowed in this Rockefeller center section of the city."

One recalls too, that other famous saying-of-the-month of the teen-age
slugger of Brooklyn, "I have always hated the bums and vagrants. They
are no use to society and have no right to live."

But the poor of East Harlem felt that Vito loved them and was interested
in them. "It was like the confessional or the clinic," someone said of
his office. "There was always someone there to listen, to advise, to
give help. Crowds came to him, and he always listened. He always tried
to help."

In the 25th chapter of St. Matthew there is a description of those who
are the saved. It is those who feed the hungry, shelter the harborless,
visit the prisoner, bury the dead, and perform the works of mercy." That
is the description of what we should be doing, given by our Lord Jesus
Christ Himself. He told another story too, of two brothers, and one said
to the commands of his father, "I won't," and yet afterwards went and
performed the works his father wanted, and the other said, "I will," and
didn't do them.

We sang a Requiem Mass for him, on Peter Maurin farm and besides the
group at the farm, and Maryanne and Helen, who were caring for the
children, there were a dozen children from his own district, from 101st
St. and First Avenue; Carol, Lee Samuel, Marthana, Verlene Wright and
Carmen Torres, Nilda, Isabella, Esperanza, Rafael, Francisco Ortero,
Felix and Pura Ruiz and Gilbert Ortiz.

May Marcantonio's soul, and the souls of all the faithful departed,
through the mercy of God (we know a little about His mercy from the
story of the prodigal son) rest in peace.
