% Requiem For Father Roy
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1954, 1, 6.

*Summary: Tender obituary of Fr. Pacifique Roy telling of his long
involvement with the Catholic Worker--his love of work, reverent way he
said Mass, joy in feasting, and how he introduced the workers to the
famous "retreat" which "made us feel the power of love." Writes of his
illness and death in his native Quebec. (DDLW \#675).*

Fr. Pacifique Roy, Josephite, is dead. He was taken ill in 1946, was
unable to be active or say Mass until two months ago when a turn for the
better enabled him to say Mass every day during the month of September.
He became ill on the Feast of St. Francis, and died on the feast of the
maternity of the Blessed Mother. He was buried two days later, and I did
not receive word until a week later, so I could not go to his requiem
mass. However, I can write his obituary.

I have written it already in a chapter called **Retreat** in **The Long
Loneliness,** but it could occupy many chapters. This short article could
not encompass all he meant to us.

Sister Peter Claver brought him one morning to the back kitchen and
dining room on the second floor of the rear tenement on Mott street,
where the Catholic Worker house was then located. He was impressed by
our poverty, which made him feel at home used as he was to the homes of
the colored in the south and in Baltimore where he was then stationed.
He had the same immediate approach to the problems of the day that we
had in the works of mercy. He always started to better conditions,
giving away what he had in money, skill, as well as spiritual gifts.
"Love is an exchange of gifts," St. Ignatius said and the spiritual and
the material were always inseparable to him. What he talked to us about
was not the social order, but love and holiness without which man cannot
see God. He spoke with such absorption that all who came, stayed to
listen, and that day found him giving, and us receiving, a little
"retreat". It was the retreat of Fr. Lacouture, his fellow
French-Canadian, which has inspired him as he inspired us that so that
we began "to see all things new". For me it was like falling in love
again. I began to understand many things. Fr. Roy talked all that
morning and all work was put aside to listen to him. Of course the
cooking went on, and the serving went on, and people came and went, but
we continued to listen. I don't remember who of us were there, but I
know all morning there was a group around him.

Although he was stationed in Baltimore, he thought nothing at all of
running up to New York on his day off, and it got so we did the same,
running down to Baltimore. We had a house there and there was many a
visit from him, and many a day of recollection he gave. He was a great
believer in fasting on bread and water during these days, although the
"water" at breakfast would consist of black coffee which helped keep us
awake during the conferences. At the close of the day, he would feast
many of us at his rectory, down in the basement of the church where the
janitor, Mr. Green, used to cook up a good meal. One time it was roast
groundhog.

Later Fr. Roy got permission to come and stay with us at Easton, Pa., at
Maryfarm, and there the first thing he did was put in electricity,
wiring the place with his own hands. Then he set himself and all others
around him to work digging ditches to bring the water from the spring on
the hill down to the barn where we set up dormitories for our retreats.

He did not reproach us with the fact that our austerity was often due to
lack of vision and hard work. He just set to work to remedy it. We had
hardship enough in the cold in the barn where the kitchen was
downstairs, the chapel library, dormitories were upstairs. Father
himself slept in the upper men's dormitory with old Mr. O'Connell, Peter
Maurin, Duncan Chisolm, Hans Tunneson, Joe Cotter and I don't know how
many others. The rest all loved him but Mr. O'Connell, who was a trial
to us all, didn't love anyone. He perhaps was going through the dark
night, to put a charitable interpretation on the matter. All natural
love seemed to pruned away from him. One morning when we were singing
the Mass down below the chapel (the men's dormitory was like a closed-in
balcony in back) Mr. O'Connell began banging on the floor with his shoe
and roaring for us to cut out the noise. Confined to his bed by illness,
we had to keep him there for some weeks until he was able to return to
his carpenter shop in which he also had his bedroom. Fr. Roy himself
used to look wryly to his altar boys, Victor Smith and John Thornton as
they sat at either side of him singing the Gloria out of tune, those
first months we started singing the Mass.

We were better later on. We had a sung Mass every day because the
diocese we were in did not permit the dialogue Mass, so we were the
gainers when Fr. Roy decided on the sung Mass.

To him Mass was truly **the work** of the day and he spared no effort to
make it as beautiful and worshipful as possible. Even during the coldest
weather when the water froze in the cruet and his hands became numb when
he said Mass slowly, reverently with a mind intent on the greatness, the
awfulness of the Sacrifice. To one priest who complained of his
powerlessness to cope with the darkness of the times, he said
courageously (it is hard to correct a priest about so personal a matter)
that if he would stop gargling the words of the Mass in his throat in a
horrible parody of oral prayer, he would be making a beginning. That
same priest who was also a sensitive soul never again slurred over the
words of the Mass. When he emphasized the fact that the maniple used to
be a cloth over the arm to wipe away the sweat and the tears of the
first priests offering up the holy sacrifice and said that when we had
participated in this great work of the day we had done the most we could
possibly do, one of the members of our community took it too much to
heart. On those days when we had no priest and Fr. Roy was away on one
of his journeys, this fellow worker used to toil down and up the long
hills to St. Joseph's two miles away and then lie recumbent for the rest
of the day while the rest of the community, including his wife, chopped
the wood, carted the water and did the work that meant warmth and food
and shelter for the community. He had done his work for the day, he
said, carrying the burden of the community for us all.

There was just enough truth in what he said to make us feel guilty at
our sloth.

Bur Fr. Roy's Mass once offered did not prevent him from being a most
diligent worker. He had what Peter Maurin called a philosophy of labor.
He took great joy in it and counted any day lost that did not see some
heavy manual work performed. He felt he could not eat his bread without
having shed some sweat. And if visitors and errands and other duties
deterred him, he started in after supper putting up shelves, hammering,
sawing, finishing off some piece of work until midnight.

In addition to saying his office, he spent an hour of adoration and in
order to make us share this hour he urged us to go to the chapel right
after breakfast to pray. I can still hear the scratching of Jane
O'Donnell's pen as she got off some letters in the last pew, or the
turning of pages of one or the other of us as we tried to avoid the
onerous duty of praying. We preferred to read about God rather than to
face Him. Fr. Roy himself had his troubles. Every time a car drove up or
a delivery was made, one could see the stirring of his expressive back,
the slight twitch of his head.

He was a good looking man, tall, lean, with warm and yet piercing eyes:
slow, sure, meditative in his movements. He had good hands well used to
toil. I remember when I once cut my hand slicing bread, he laughed and
said, "Rejoice in the Lord always!" and later when he cut his hand on
the circular saw and had to drive himself, streaming with the blood to
the hospital four miles away, I asked him when I returned from the city
whether he had rejoiced. "I danced with joy," he said, "especially when
they were sewing me up."

He liked to sing French folk songs and I remember Polly Robinson driving
in to the city with us singing with him. She was a Quaker and a
pacifist, visiting us for a bit, and when Fr. Roy, with French
discretion thought about it after he justified his singing with "One
must reach people in many ways, you know." But it was he who was severe,
not us. He didn't like a radio in the house, and certainly he would
never have stood for television. Both let in too much of the world. It
would make for tepidity, he thought and the lukewarm, God vomits out of
his mouth.

But he loved parties and we celebrated many feast days. He loved to go
down to the A&P on Saturday night and collect their leftovers which they
gave us free and many a time we were up late cleaning turkeys with
already odorous insides, and burying luxury fish in the snow outside in
lieu of a deep freeze. We didn't care if the dogs got them, nor did we
care much for turkey when we got through. When he had to pay for food
(he was almost too paternal we often thought) he'd buy pigs feet or such
cheap delicacies and Eileen McCarthy used to beg him for a little of the
pig higher up. She meant a ham, of course, but Father countered her
Irish wit with some of his own; he brought her some pigs' tails!

He shopped, he built, he dug, he all but started a lumber mill. It was
during the war and there was a great scarcity of lumber, so one day
during his hour's meditation, with his eyes glued to the floor before
him, it occurred to him that the boards on the floor, used to
accommodating trucks and farm wagons and tractors were unnecessarily
thick for a chapel and library. He started at the very conclusion of his
hour, tearing up the boards from the floor of the chapel, leaving great
chasms looking down to the depths of the former cow stalls below. It did
not matter that a retreat was to start the following Friday night. In
fact there were still great gaps in the floor when the retreatants
started to arrive, and they were put to work nailing down the floor with
the boards which had come in greater quantity from the saw mill on the
hill made from the four inch thick flooring that he had taken up. He
quadrupled his supply of wood by the move.

Hans Tunnesen kept up with him in much of his work, though Hans was
cooking and baking at the time. He complained though that all the work
Fr. Roy did was geared to tall men--the sink was too high, the shelves
too high, the tables and benches too high--even the toilet seats in the
new outhouses which Fr. Roy built were too high, indelicate though it
may be to mention it. But it all goes to show how encompassing, how all
embracing his love and fatherly concern for us was.

Our life in those years was indeed beautiful, with work, with song, with
worship, with feastings and fastings. He was strict about the latter and
many a supper was of corn meal mush or oatmeal. He ate with us, he
shared all our hardships, he rejoiced and sorrowed with us. He heard our
confessions and he gave us the bread of life.

And he introduced us to **the retreat.** We always refer to is as that
or as "the basic retreat," although we have made many a stimulating
retreat since under men who have never heard of Fr. Roy or Fr.
Lacouture. He gave us conference after conference and gave the same
conferences over and over again, with the same enthusiasm. We didn't
mind it when he would insist that Fr. Onesimus Lacouture was the
greatest preacher since St. Paul. We were used to enthusiasms that
tended to exaggeration and hyperbole. We knew what he meant. What he
convinced us of was that God loved us and had so loved us that He gave
his own Son, why by His life and death sent forth a stream of graces
that made us brothers in grace, closer than blood brothers to Him and to
each other. He made us know what love meant and what the inevitable
suffering of love meant. He taught us when there were hatreds and
rivalries among us and bitterness and resentments, that we were
undergoing purifications, prunings, in order to bear a greater fruit of
love. He made us feel the power of love, he kept our faith in love.
Soloviev has written of this power, in The Meaning of Love.

Perhaps Fr. Lacouture was not much of a theologist as theologists go,
nor Fr. Roy either. Perhaps there was "inexactitude of expression,"
perhaps he was misunderstood and people went to extremes in their hatred
of the world; perhaps he was a reproach to the clergy in his
condemnation of luxury and even more in the implied reproach of his way
of living, in his unuttered criticism, his lack of human respect. I
suppose he felt his lack but he tried to make up for it by giving us the
best he had and the lives of the saints to read and the Imitation of
Christ, chapter by chapter as penance in the Confessional.

He also sent us to Fr. John J. Hugo of the Pittsburgh diocese of whom I
can write much, and probably will in a future story of the retreat. "The
man who can really give the retreat is Fr. Hugo," he always told us, and
before even Fr. Roy had come to live with us, we had gone for those
retreats at Oakmount, which brought such joy to our souls. Fr. Roy
himself visited Pittsburgh and stayed at St. Anthony's Village where the
retreats were held, and at the House of Our Lady of Good Counsel, which
was started in the Hill District. He was the despair of the other
priests by the charge account which he ran up at "Jimbels," as he called
the store, for photographic materials, he was preparing slides of the
Shroud of Turin and the lives of the saints to teach the children and
all of us, and the colored on the Hill at the time.

Fr. Roy's wanderings took him on a trip to St. John's in Minnesota where
he prepared a retreat which ninety-five priests attended and which Fr.
Hugo gave. It caused a good deal of controversy among the more
articulate of the priests, but many a letter I received from priests who
made the retreat and who found out too, that it made all things new. Fr.
Flannigan of Boys' Town was one of them.

I could say that if it were not for Fr. Roy, **Applied Christianity** by
Fr. Hugo would never have been written, or gone into the many editions
that it did--or those other masterly works. **In the Vineyard, The
Weapons of the Spirit, The Gospel of Peace, Catholics Can Be
Conscientious Objectors** and **The Crime of Conscription,** not one of
which has ever been condemned through the controversy about this
presentation of Christian-doctrine goes on still.

That we must die in order to live, die to the natural to put on Christ,
we must offer ourselves up as a sacrifice with Christ. Many of the
priests who have taught this doctrine have experienced it. Fr. Roy used
to say, "God takes us at our word. We little know what we say." He
himself after a few years with us most certainly became a "victim soul"
to use an expression of modern piety which has become stereotyped and
shop worn. He loved above all things, in the natural order, his active
life of work. He had a passion for work, one could see it, just as Peter
Maurin had a passion for thinking, for indoctrinating. Both were great
teachers, who taught by their single mindedness and their lives. And
both had to pay the price.

One morning, not long after his extensive traveling and preaching in
the south (it showed the greatness and wisdom of his superior that he
was given such complete liberty) he got up to say Mass in our barn
chapel and we were horrified to find him suddenly communicating right
after the Sanctus bell, before even he had consecrated the Host. By the
vagueness of his words and gestures we saw that something had happened,
something similar to what had happened to Peter Maurin. He might have
had a slight stroke in his sleep which impaired his memory, it might
have been a blood clot on the brain,--none of us knew enough about these
things to say. It was hard to get him to a doctor. What he wanted, he
said, reverting almost to childhood, was to go home. He wanted to get up
to Montreal, where in the bosom of his family, he could be diagnosed and
treated. "Maybe he needed the rest of his teeth pulled out," he said
naively. His nephew was a dentist and he could do it.

So Harold Keane took him by plane to Montreal and he took up his home in
his sister's house. The next thing we heard was that he was in the Hotel
Dieu, in the ward for mental patients. What had happened was that he had
gotten lost, had wondered away in upstate Quebec and was found in a tiny
village, living with a priest too, and serving as altar boy. The priest
had not known he was a priest too, dressed in a suit over a pair of
pajamas as he was, but took him to be some poor man, wandering in.
(Mauriac said that Christ was a man so much like other men that it took
the kiss of a Judas to single him out.)

I went to see him in the mental hospital where it is also customary here
in the states also to put people who have lost their memories. He
remembered me, but not the others at the farm. He cried a little when he
showed me a bruised face where one of the other patients, another
priest, had struck him. He told me how an attendant changing his bed had
called him a dirty old pig. He wept like a child and them remembering,
suddenly smiled and said, "Rejoice!" I was crying too, and in our shared
tears, I felt free to ask him something I would never had said
otherwise, feeling that it would be an unwarranted and most indelicate
prying. "Are you, have you offered yourself," I asked, "as a victim?"

It was then he said to me, "We are always saying to God things we don't
really mean, and he takes us at our word. He really loves us and and
believes us."

Fr. Roy didn't have to say in the hospital very long. He could go home
again to his dearly loved sister, Mrs. Riendeau who with her husband
carefully cared for him this summer. (His order always paid all his
expenses.) Then there was an opportunity for him to live in a retreat
for old and ill priests at Trois Rivieres, Quebec, where with the help
and guidance of a brother priest, he was enabled to offer up once more
the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. For only two months he had this great
privilege and then he became ill with what they took to be a slight case
of grippe and within less than a fortnight, he died. He was fully
conscious when he received the last rites of the Church and he died, his
sister wrote me, rejoicing.

Eye has not seen, nor ear heard what the Lord has promised to them that
serve Him. And since Wisdom is the most active of all active things, Fr.
Roy is once again active though most assuredly, with an activity which
enables him to rest in peace.
