% Books Received
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1954, 4.

*Summary: Recommends many books: novels, history, about saints, social
teachings of the Church. Singles out a book for teaching children about
God and one about Martin de Porres. (DDLW \#678).*

"A book is a window by which one escapes," Julian Green says, "Spiritual
reading is the oil which keeps the lamp burning."

A new series of paper-covered books, Image books, published by
Doubleday, provides windows aplenty and the oil to keep the lamp burning
when it is night or the day is dim. We cannot praise this series enough.
They are all reprints which have gone out of print and books which
people have borrowed and never returned, perhaps because they kept
passing them on.

**"THE DIARY OF A COUNTRY PRIEST"** is one of them, by George Bernanos.
The movie made from the book could never do justice to it. His
discussion of poverty, of war, are unforgettable.

**"DAMIEN THE LEPER,"** by John Farrow. When one of the women in St.
Joseph's house read this book she wanted to set right off for Molokai.

**OUR LADY OF FATIMA,** by William Thomas Walsh. An unforgettable scene
is that of the children in prison. 

**A POPULAR HISTORY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH** by Fr. Philip Hughes. Peter Maurin used to say that the best way to study history is to study the history of the Church. 

**THE SPIRIT OF CATHOLICISM,**by Fr. Karl Adam. The first serious book I read as a convert to the Church. I've given it to countless prospective converts
since, and now this cheap price, 75c means everyone can have it. 

**PEACE OF SOUL,** by Bishop Fulton J. Sheen. A message of hope, that most
sinned against of all virtues. Dom Chapman says the most important work
in the spiritual life is to achieve peace of soul. "First keep thyself
in peace and then thou wilt be able to bring others to peace," reads the
Imitation. 

**THE CHURCH SPEAKS TO THE MODERN WORLD,** the social
teachings of Leo XIII, with an introduction by Etienne Gibson, and this
is an Image book original. Here is a book so rich, so full of meat, so
encyclopedic, that it alone could educate a man.

The prices are different on each book. The last named is 95c; The others
are 65, 75, and 85c and we hope they are well sold on every book stand
in every bus station and railroad terminal and corner candy store in the
country.

And oh, yes, here is another one at the bottom of the heap, for fifty
cents

**MR. BLUE,**by Myles Connolly, an old favorite, a little work of
genius. It is not much more than a long short story, but when Peter
Maurin read it he dashed off a letter, back in 1932, asking Myles
Connolly to be the editor of **THE CATHOLIC WORKER,** but since the
paper had not even started yet, and Myles had a good job in Hollywood,
it is easy to be seen why he is not now living on Chrystie street.


**We and Our Children** (Molding the child in Christian living) by Mary
Reed Newland, P.J. Kenedy and Sons. $3.50. 267 pages and a
bibliography. Here is a book which every mother and grandmother will
enjoy and refer to, and they will not only learn how to teach their own
children, but they will be planning themselves and reopen their own
spiritual lives. Remembering how my own grandchild said last Christmas
that he was bigger than God since God was a little baby, I was delighted
to read how Mary Newland taught her children under four about the
Trinity. "After much thinking and struggling, we have hit on a way,
inadequate at best, of trying to explain the three-Persons-in-one God by
comparing it to their own human father. At home, among the children, he
is known as Daddy and his role is that of father. At work among his
fellow workers, he is known as Mr. Newland and his role is that of wage
earner. To Mother he is known as Bill and his role is husband. He is the
same man but he has three different roles to play. Very roughly it draws
a parallel to the Three Divine Persons of the Trinity. God the Father we
think of as Creator, God the Son as Redeemer and God the Holy Ghost we
think of as Divine Love."

I skipped all over the book, finding each part delightful and then
passed it on to my daughter who will enjoy it as she always has, Mrs.
Newland's articles in Integrity. I'm only praying she does not die of
envy at the idea of the fourteen-room house for the Newland m√©nage of
ten people, not too large at all, for a growing family. On the other
hand a small house with small children, when there is an attic and
basement, can be a comfort too, easy to heat and easy to keep an eye on
the children in.

Mrs. Newland lectures all over New England as well as writes, and one
can see that her writing is an outgrowth of her living. It is all tried
and true stuff.

And here is a beautiful book to give a child for Christmas, **Martin de
Porres Hero,** by Clair Huchet Bishop, illustrated by Jean Charlo.
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston. $2.50. Martin de Porres is one of our
favorites and many of the Catholic Worker Houses of Hospitality have
been named after him. On Mott street, when Ade de Bethune was drawing
murals, she made a big one of the Blessed Martin, kneeling by the bed of
an irascible sick man, feeding him with a big spoon, from a big dish of
beans which some of the men in the house pointed out as very
indigestible for a sick man. That picture and that saint made an
impression on the men who came in to eat with us every day on the bread
line. Only recently one of them came in and told me that years ago, when
he had two broken arms, he came to the Catholic Worker and was spoon-fed
just as that sick man was. Again we find a saint devoting much time to
the sick, serving as an assistant to a doctor before he became a lay
brother in the Dominican order, and afterwards showing even profligacy
in taking in everyone in need, so that every extra room and corridor of
the convent was filled. Martin is a New World St. Francis in his love of
birds and beasts and the descriptions of his encounters with them are
beautiful. The story I like best in the book is how Martin came across
some poor children hiding up in a fig tree, so they would not be caught
stealing fruit, and how he found a piece of unclaimed land for them and
got fig tree saplings and helped them plant an orchard for themselves
which became the orchard of the poor children of Lima for years to come.
Why didn't we do that with our Puerto Rican children this summer when
the neighbors complained about them stealing fruit? Oh, the
opportunities we miss!

This book is so good, and the illustrations in it so charming, that I am
sure our readers will want all the other books of Clare Bishop for their
children's libraries.
