% On Pilgrimage - September 1956
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1956, 6, 7.

*Summary: Graphic description of a visit to a prisoner on death row and
other stories of terrible deaths in their neighborhood. Asks "Where to
lay the blame?" Lashes out against "this rotten, decadent, putrid
industrial capitalist system" calling for building up all forms of
mutual aid. (DDLW \#710).*

There is a huge truck entrance to the Eastern State Penitentiary in
Philadelphia, and the visiting hours from 1:30 to 3:00 had begun when I
arrived there a few weeks ago to see the Prisoner. He has been condemned
to die, and we at the Catholic Worker got acquainted with him when he
wrote to us offering us his library, his furniture, and even his eyes,
when his sentence should have been carried out. His case was on appeal,
and that appeal has been denied, and now it goes to another court, and
as long as he has money to pay a lawyer, his case can go on. There is
another convicted murderer in one of the Pennsylvania jails who has been
appealing his case for the last eight years.

It is terrible to visit a jail. Men are not made to be confined like
animals behind bars. Once a man escaped from this particular jail buried
in a truck full of hot ashes, and another time some men escaped though
the sewer. But they were all caught.

Once inside the huge entrance, there are show cases to the left where
dolls and animals and boats and other things carved out of wood by the
prisoners are on display. There is another gate going inside, and here I
caught a glimpse of green, a privet hedge, which seems to grow
everywhere even in our own stony back yard. "Is there any green?" I
asked the prisoner later when he told me about his two hours exercise a
day. "The men have stuck watermelon seeds in the cracks of the wall, but
when they grow they are pulled out," he said.

To get to the visitors' room you go through a passageway into a long low
room, also vaulted, passing wash rooms, a few cells, and there was a
room divided by iron bars, with room for the prisoners on one side, and
fourteen stools for visitors on the other. One could lean on a counter,
up against a wire netting which covered the bars. The stools were low
and the counter was low. There was one very young guard standing at the
door where the prisoners came out to take their seats, facing their
visitors and others sat waiting, young colored girls in crinoline, with
bare arms, ballet shoes, impassive faces; others wide mouthed, rouged,
laughing, full-bosomed. There was a mother and child, white, there was a
gay blonde with a striped blouse and riding breeches and no stockings
and bedroom slippers. Many of the women found it easier to stand than to
sit, and they bent over like horses in stalls, to get as close to the
wire and the bars as possible. They presented a variety of haunches,
pink, blue, flowered, striped, black and white, looking like the hind
quarters of a zebra, or of horses, or even of some apes. In what
grotesque positions people find themselves.

The place had filled up so when the Prisoner I had come to see was
brought out, one of the others who had three visitors had to confine
himself to one, and I squeezed in and sat on the stool between the woman
and the two-year-old child perched on the counter in front of her, and
the blonde with the horse's tail hair-do. There we were, elbow to elbow,
each one seeing only the one ahead of him, those on my right
communicating by silences, and those on my left by ardent sighs and
kisses. The woman with the child was a plain woman with tightly-dressed
brown hair and the child clapped his hands and called **Daddy** over and
over. When the father looked at his child his face was warm and alive
and when he turned to his wife there was a grim bitter look distorting
it.

The Prisoner I came to see was a tall, well-built man, intelligent
looking, blue-eyed, fair skin down which little drops of moisture
trailed. It was a stifling day and as we talked a storm came up. Then
one could hear the deluge through the three barred windows in back of
the room. Thunder roared every now and then through the vaults.

We talked about Ammon's previous visit, the books of poetry I had sent,
Gerard Manley Hopkins, Raymond R. F. Larrsen, and his copying the works
of the latter.

It was hard to talk. "How the time must drag." "No, it goes very fast.
You do not know where the days go." And then you remember the sentence
of death, and you know the time slips by inexorably.

What men get used to. "Stringing them up by their thumbs for instance,
they get used to that." I caught his talk only in snatches. "Get so they
don't mind it. I was never normal. No one liked me. I antagonized. I
teased, never knew when to stop...made enemies. Yes, I am legally sane.
I know right from wrong. But the psychiatrists have listed me as all
sorts of things...a monster...There is an arson case here, a young
fellow back from Korea. He'd seen plenty of blazing houses over there.
He was convicted of burning down some houses out Chester way, and given
fifty years. No one died in the fires. He burnt barns and empty houses.
There was great property damage. Judge refused to put him in a mental
hospital because he might burn that down with the people in it. Jails
are made of steel and stone. He gets no treatment here. If they do let
him out in fifty years he may go out and do it all over again. Men are
trained to destruction and then jailed for it.

"There are men of all ages here, boys to old men. It is no place for a
boy to be. I am reading, studying, seeing how much I can learn.
Languages, science. There is so much to learn and so little time."

Living by the exterior and interior senses, I thought, and not by faith,
but how talk about faith? It is so hard. "Have you been away from it
long?" I asked him. Only a few years. "Religion, it comes and goes. I
only gave it up a short time ago." And now he had fallen into an abyss.

Oh, my God, I remember the cruelties in my own life, my own angers and
hatreds, and then the words of Jesus, "But I say unto you, that he who
says, **Thou fool** is in danger of everlasting fire." I remember seeing
some boys stoning a cat, hung up by its tail. I remember a movie I saw
years ago, of Pancho Villa, and how he had one of his enemies buried up
to his neck, and his face and head were smeared with honey near an ant
hill, and an old fat woman sitting next to me screamed with mirth to
match the victim's cries. And I saw Shorty once, and some of the others
at table, laughing at a man with epileptic seizures, as his arms jerked
and he could not get his food to his mouth. And so often on Friday
nights there is loud and raucous laughter when someone distracted in
mind asks involved questions.

Where does cruelty begin and end? We fail by little and by little. If we
do not correspond to the grace God gives us He will withdraw it. Judge
no man lest you yourself be judged. There but for the grace of God, I
go. Let him who is without sin cast the first stone. We must forgive
seventy times seven.

On the one hand a murder committed through lust. On the other hand, "He
who looks at a woman to lust after her, has already committed adultery
in his heart." Our contact with sin should only cause us to see it as
the reflection of what is in ourselves. This is not to condone, nor to
pity. Last month we saw "**The Ice Man Cometh**" and if anything it is a
lesson showing us the corroding effects of pity. Only God can have
compassion on the multitude, one thinks, in such cases as these. This
visit was to respond, to answer a call, to communicate with a brother,
to be obedient to the duty of the moment, to stand by and to pray. To
pray that the Prisoner will again pray himself that anguished prayer, "I
believe, help thou my unbelief." And the Jesus prayer, "O my Lord Jesus,
have mercy on me a sinner."

Outside, in the fresh air, speeding along the highway in a Trailways
bus, I counted the wild flowers along the gullies and the hills, Queen
Anne's Lace, blue sailor, Bouncing Betsy, orange field lilies, milkweed
blossoms, butter and eggs, purple and white clover, wild carrot and wild
parsley, black eyed susans, mullein and elderberry. How good God is that
He should give us such beauty.

"The world is too much with us." When I am in New York, after peace at
Peter Maurin Farm, suddenly we are surrounded by violence. This last
month there were two bodies found wrapped up in burlap and stuffed into
the trunk of a car, across the street. A few days later a crazed old man
of seventy killed the woman janitor of his building, and the owner of it
who had come to collect the rent. He had been infatuated with this young
mother of a family, who worked so hard in this building, and was jealous
and suspicious of the owner who came to see her regularly.

Then this morning a man was found dead on a park bench, just opposite
our front windows. Chrystie Street runs north and south, along the west
side of the parkway which was made when the city planners tore down all
the old tenements from Houston to Manhattan bridge. This park has
playgrounds for the children of the area, and the benches surrounding
the playgrounds are always filled with the homeless. Just opposite the
house, just south of Houston, we always see the benches filled. This man
who died must have just come from our Coffee Line at six thirty, gone
over to the park bench, put his head down on his folded arm and then
quietly died of heart failure. His posture was peaceful. He had been
dead several hours when we returned from morning Mass and saw the
ambulance from Bellevue Hospital taking him away.

I talked to the policeman standing there and asked him whether he had
called a priest when he found the body. "No use," he said. "He had been
dead about two hours,"

"But I had been told by priests that when one died in his sleep or very
suddenly as this man did, one should always call the priest to give
conditional absolution."

"Well, the priests at the mission told me that if the man had been dead
some time, we did not need to call them."

May God have mercy on his soul. May this poor man and all the faithful
departed, through the mercy of God, rest in peace.

\*\*\*
---

Another incident. Some teenagers got rough down on the lower east side,
with two plain clothes-men and one fourteen-year-old hit one of the
detectives with a bat. Flinging his bat to one side, the youth fled, and
the detective shot after him. The second bullet struck him in the chest.

And here is the most horrifying story of all. And where to lay the
blame?

A Puerto Rican woman, very poor and disheveled, went into a tavern to
make a telephone call, and having difficulty in getting her number,
began to make a disturbance. She could not speak English, and when she
objected to being evicted from the tavern, clung to the door and
resisted. The bartender called the police, who in turn called the
Bellevue ambulance from the psychiatric ward where she was taken. She
continued to make a disturbance there about her children, but none could
understand what she was talking about, and after a few days she calmed
down and told another Puerto Rican woman that they were being well cared
for. Ten days is the usual stay for observation at Bellevue Psychiatric
ward. In about ten days a social worker from the department of welfare
went to the tenement where the woman lived, to make a routine visit--she
usually went there every two weeks. She knocked on the door and no one
answered. Trying the door knob she found it open and went in. As soon as
she opened the door a dreadful smell offended her. Entering the three
little rooms she found there two dead babies, lying in bed, dead from
starvation. They had been dead some days. The house was one of those
rabbit warrens, a huge tenement, filled with little apartments, so
crammed, so filled with people with problems, with the desperate
struggle to make ends meet, so filled with noise, that if the babies had
cried, who was there to hear them? Radio and television, the noises of
the street, the noises of other children, all these sounds drowned out
the weak cries of those starving children who lay there mute and failing
until death took them. O God, you have to make up to those little ones,
what they have suffered here on this earth! O God, how to understand
this mystery of suffering? How to forgive the heartlessness of men who
grind the faces of the poor, who trample on their hearts.

Whose fault is it? Where to lay the blame? Was it the fault of the
impatient tavern keeper or bartender who called the police in the first
place instead of patiently trying to find out what the woman wanted, why
she was having a hard time in getting her telephone message across. She
had been trying to call the camp up in Nanuet where her two older
children were being cared for. She had been deserted by her husband, she
could not work, she could not speak English. Was it the fault of the
welfare people? They are usually overworked, exhausted with the
suffering they see around them. They are doing people a favor by not
calling on them more than once every two weeks. Was it the fault of the
authorities at Bellevue Psychiatric hospital? They should have people
there who understood Spanish and could find out the situation of the
woman as soon as she was brought in, of course. I should say that the
fault was there more than anywhere else. I know that several of our
friends who could not assert themselves had been made to wait all day
long at the clinics, and on two occasions have actually been forgotten,
left sitting on the benches until after five o'clock after a long day
seeking help.. So much money is spent on buildings and so little on
people, on social workers, on attendants, on doctors. Even the resident
doctors get little or nothing for their services. The laborer is worthy
of his hire. People always fall back on the phrase, "It is the system."
We need to change the system. We need to overthrow, not the government,
as the authorities are always accusing the Communists "of conspiring to
teach to do," but this rotten, decadent, putrid industrial capitalist
system which breeds such suffering in the whited sepulcher of New York.

\*\*\*
---

On the feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, I always
remember how it is the voice of the people which first makes the feast.
Down the ages, the people held the view that just as Christ rose from
the dead, just as we recited in the creed that we believed in the
resurrection of the body, so also we believed that that dear flesh which
bore the Son of God did not suffer corruption in the grave but was borne
up into Heaven. "Much weight must be given to the common sentiment of
the faithful," the parish bulletin says from old St. Patrick's Church.
"Paulinus of Nola, an author of great weight bids us adhere to the voice
of the faithful, since the spirit of God breathes upon them all."

This demands much thought and study, considering the common man's
addiction to all the bread and circuses that are presented to him today.
But Guardini in "The Church and the Catholic" has written beautifully
about the people, and Pope Pius XII in one of his Christmas messages,
has differentiated beautifully between the terms "the people" and "the
masses."

Thinking on these things, one realizes how important it is to go to the
people, to be one of the poor, one of the workers, to be one with the
man on the street, and there to discuss with him, to bring him "the good
news," the gospel, the peace on earth that can begin here and now.
That's why Ammon Hennacy's picketing is important, that is why we go out
on the street with placards, and with copies of **The Catholic Worker**.
We have a chance to come face to face with objections, with correction,
and to begin again and again with simplicity, to state in ever simpler
terms what we believe is our "talent" to bring to the world today,
invested and multiplied until the people themselves renounce war and say
that no property rights, no Suez Canal, no oil wells, no balance of
power are sufficient reasons for going to even a "localized war"; that
we do not believe in "our country, right or wrong," although we love our
own native land and would not chose to live anywhere else.

We are happy to see the peoples of Iceland and others objecting to our
air bases and we hope that the people will awaken to the fact that our
occupation of islands like Formosa for defense of our coasts is just as
fantastic as if the Russians occupied Vancouver and Newfoundland as air
bases to defend themselves.

The principles we stand for in the moral order, in the natural order,
and, of course, in the supernatural order cannot be defended by force of
arms.

\*\*\*
---

We enjoy reading our parish bulletins. One time there was an article of
Dr. John J. Hugo reprinted, and there are always quotations from
spiritual writers and instruction. It is an old familiar thing this
parish bulletin, but there is a new syndicated one in some churches
whose teaching I find most objectionable. In the last few issues there
are detailed articles on how to make money grow, treating money as
though it were something alive, instead of a means of exchange, quite
worthless in itself. There are elaborate examples of a Mr. C. and a Mr.
D. who made gifts to the church of $2500 a year for ten years which
accounts up to $25,000. And yet it costs him only $12,500. What
miracle is this? You figure it out this way. You get out of paying
federal income taxes on that amount and that is a great saving. The
money is reinvested by the financial wizards of the church and the
dividend on that is then reinvested, and all added together, and
counting on increasing prosperity and employment for the next years, it
is all very simply put down on paper like an example of arithmetic.

Even more interesting is the fact that if you make an initial investment
of $250, the true cost at the end of ten years is $7,350, and if you
make an initial investment of $2,500, your true cost at the end of ten
years is only $8,700.

I must say that when I think of a dollar I think of beans for the soup
line or lodging for someone sleeping on the sidewalk, or a growing
farming commune, and the increase I love to think of is the growth of
life in the soul and the soil, and the seed falling into the ground and
dying and bringing forth much fruit. You should see the bushel baskets
of tomatoes and cucumbers being brought into the House of Hospitality in
town, and the shelves of jars filling up in the barn for winter. This is
real wealth.

Peter Maurin would give forth right now with an essay on money lending
at interest, and the evils of the capitalist acquisitive society and how
it is immoral to use money to make money.

We need to study more how to build up credit unions, producers'
cooperatives, maternity guilds, and other forms of mutual aid, building
these new institutions within the shell of the old.
