% Vocation to Prison
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1957, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: In jail for civil disobedience she describes in graphic detail
the experience of detention--noise, animality, despair, mistreatment,
"the ugliness of it all". She has particular sympathy for the drug
addicts and prostitutes. Sees her stay as visiting the prisoner and an
opportunity to tell the story of those in jail. Points to the need for
faith in small actions and for prayer. (DDLW \#726).*

Last month while I was in jail, I received a letter from a member of the
Grail school of the Lay Apostolate, Mary Alice Duddy, who has been
working in Brazil for some years. She wrote:

"A year ago I was in Rio and we visited the Little Sisters of Charles de
Foucault in the little hut in the Favella on the Sao Carlos hill. I've
thought of this so much these days in relation to you, Dorothy. The
little hut is overlooking the women's prison at Rio and there are two
Little Sisters voluntarily in the prison, leading the daily life of the
women who have been sentenced--just out of love and to remind them of
Christ and His love for all of us. I felt such an affinity between the
Little Sisters who were 'free' with the Blessed Sacrament in the tiny
little room of that hut, and those who were imprisoned. So much prayer
going out to encourage and sustain the ones who were not free."

Perhaps in Latin American countries it is possible, with the Catholic
background and understanding, to have one's self committed, but it would
not be possible in New York or any American city. However they got
there, I was touched to the heart at this letter and felt the influence
of that prayer all the way up to the Women's House of Detention, the
seventh floor, corridor A, cell 13, coming from Brazil for prisoners.
Never again will I forget to pray for them, because I feel that they are
the most abandoned of God's children. Certainly visiting the prisoner is
one of the seven corporal works of mercy, and yet it is made all but
impossible even for "the friendly visitors" who are a recognized
organization who bring gifts to the prison, but are never able to
penetrate its bars and walls on those floors above.

Here there seems to be no room for the spiritual. Physical care is given
in the clinic and hospital, there are five doctors in attendance, nurses
and nurses aides, etc., and after all the preliminary tests and
examinations, x-rays, cardiographs, blood tests, smears, and so on are
taken, every day for the duration of one's stay, the shout "CLINIC"
reverberates through the corridors, several times a day, and girls leave
their work shops, their cells, to vary the monotony of their days by
waiting in line for an aspirin, lotion for heat rash, gargle, eye wash,
and various other innocuous remedies and have the refreshment of a visit
with inmates from other floors at the same time.

Play is encouraged, bingo, basket ball, interpretive dancing and
calisthenics, but sexual play is the most popular and is indulged in
openly every evening on the roof when the girls put on rock and roll
records. Two in a cell does not help matters, but the authorities deny
the overcrowding now since a new ruling was passed permitting ten days
off a month for good behaviour on the long term women, so that just
before we pacifists came in to serve our thirty day sentence, a great
many prisoners were released. Just the same a dozen or a score of cells
on our floor held two cots, which made our six by nine rooms more
crowded than the tiniest hall bedroom. (I read Kon-Tiki from the prison
library while there, and my cell seemed like the raft they lived on as
the mariners crossed the Pacific.)

One stout woman who had a cell to herself, was so cramped on the very
narrow cot, that she hitched her cot up against the wall by the iron
chain put there for that purpose to make cleaning easier, and spread a
blanket out on the cement floor and slept there as in a tent.

The four of us who were arrested for violating the civil defense law had
cells next to each other, and we were two in a cell, on the most airless
corridor, with the darkest cells. We had a 25 watt bulb in ours, Judith
Beck and I, until the last week when a tall young Negro climbed on the
cot and took out a 50 watt bulb from another cell which had just been
vacated. Our cells faced North, and were all but against the old
Jefferson Market court. We felt that this was because of the picketing
which was going on during the month, and because from the C and D
corridors, we would have had better windows and could have looked out.
Opposite us were the showers steaming with heat and closets for extra
cots and mattresses so there was no cross ventilation. One of the
captains said she thought she was putting us in a good corridor, next to
each other, and said she thought she was doing us a favor, but it was so
obviously the least desirable and most airless and dark corridor, that I
do not see how she could honestly think that. Perhaps she did. I do know
that every move made from the time one is arrested until the time one
leaves a prison, everything seems to be calculated to try to intimidate,
and to render uncomfortable and ugly the life of the prisoner.

How entirely opposite the work of the Good Shepherd nuns is, whose
Mother Foundress said that her aim was to make the girls happy and
comfortable and industrious, and who surrounded her charges with love
and devotion and with the expectation of good.

"Here we are treated like animals," one girl said to me of the House of
Detention, "and so why shouldn't we act like animals." Perhaps I do not
know much about biology, but it seems to me that perversion is not
practiced by animals. Nor do animals speak the unutterable filth that
punctuates the conversation of prisoners. So in a way these prisoners
are pushed below the animal level.

Prisoners only? I mentioned this to someone who was working in a steel
mill and he said the language was the same there. A girl who worked in a
factory on Canal Street in New York said the language of the women was
foul in her place of work, too. The kind old woman who comes each
Saturday at one o'clock to the chapel of the jail to instruct the few
inmates who show up in how to go to confession tells the girls to
counter such obscenity and profanity with the phrase "Blessed be God."
That is good, and I used her reminder over and over again. But it is not
enough. When the reaction to one's work in factory and mill and laundry
and kitchen is an expression of hostility towards employer and fellow
worker, couched in such terms so unutterably horrible, one can only
conclude that the life of the worker today is one of anguished boredom,
frustration, a dissipation of the life forces. It does not need to be
so. In a Commonweal article, Fr. De Manasce said once that the reason
for the emphasis on sex these days is that man is so thwarted in his
work. There is no joy in it, no happiness, no pleasure, no sense of
creativity. Generally workers call this life a rat race, to express its
bestiality. And they hate the boss for the pressure put upon them. And
in their everspreading hatred and bitterness they try to befoul this
most sacred love. When they strive to express this in curse and
expletive they go all the way back to Oedipus and accuse each other of
knowingly committing the crime which he unwittingly committed, and for
which he nevertheless endured the voluntary penance of putting out his
own eyes. Without the use of four letter words, I can thus describe the
constant, daily, hourly language. Shouts, jeers, defiance of guards,
jailors, officers (however they wish to be called) and each other,
expressed in these ways, reverberate through the cells and corridors at
night while one tries to pray, rosary in hand. It is possible too to say
the Jesus prayer, "My Lord Jesus Christ, son of the living God, have
mercy upon us sinners," that prayer so famous in the east, so popular in
Russia. One wonders if anywhere in that land of official atheism, it is
still being offered up.

Noise, perhaps that is the greatest torture in jail. It stuns the ear,
the mind. It took me a week to recover from it after I came out. The
city itself seemed silent. A strong healthy Polish Jewish girl who
should have used her great vitality working with a mate on the land and
in bearing children instead of dissipating it in prostitution and drugs,
held her head in her hands and cried. To her even it was the worst
torture,--the noise. Yet she herself was one of the worst offenders.
When she started her ribald stories at night, her voice reverberated
from cell to cell. "But this place was not made to live in," she
complained, pointing to the iron bars, the cement and tiled walls. "The
ceilings are low, the sounds bounce around."

Everything sounded exaggeratedly loud,--the television in the "rec" room
on each floor blared in the most distorted way. One heard clamor, not
words or music. The clanging of gates--seventy gates on a floor, on the
four corridors, the pulling of the lever of each corridor which locked
all the cells in each corridor, the noise of the three elevators, the
banging of pots and pans and dishes from the dining room,--all these
sounds made the most unutterable din, aside from the human voice. The
guard, one to a floor, has to have strong lungs and throat to be heard,
and a compelling presence. Our guard whom we had during our five days in
January, as well as this 25 days in July and August, could make herself
heard. She looked like a stern school teacher and she seldom smiled and
never "fraternized." The women respected her. "She's an honest cop," one
of them said of her. "She's just what she is and does not pretend to be
anything else." That meant that she did not get friendly with any one of
the girls either honestly to help them, or to get over familiar with
them. I saw a few of the guards being treated with the greatest
effrontery by the prisoners, who did not hesitate to whack them across
the behind as they went in and out of the elevator,--who kidded with
them as equals, and whose overtures were greeted by the same guards with
smiling acceptance. A "good" officer had to know just how far to go in
severity too; just how firm to be and just how much to put up with, to
overlook. I saw one guard give what we thought was a friendly push to a
prisoner, to hasten her exit from the auditorium where the prisoners had
just put on a summer show and the prisoner turned on her viciously,
threateningly. The officers do not press the point on such an occasion.
They realize they are sitting on a volcano. They know when to back down.
But there were a number of occasions when I was ashamed for them,
witnessing their humiliation. The hostility of the Negro for the white
flares up on such an occasion, and helpless as the prisoner may seem to
be, she knows too that she is the superior in numbers, that she can
start something if she wants to, and she knows too the worst she has to
expect. In many cases the worst has already happened. They have
undergone the "cold turkey cure."

When I was invited to speak on Night Beat, in a letter addressed to me
in the prison, and of course opened and commented on all over the House
of Detention, the prisoners came to me and begged me to tell the world
"How we are put here for long terms,--and about the cold turkey cure
too. About how we are thrown in the 'tank' and left to lie there in our
own vomit and filth, too sick to move, too sick even to get to the open
toilet in the cell."

"I know," one girl added, "because I had to clean out those places."
These cells are called tanks because they are so bare of furnishings
they can be hosed out, I suppose. "The cooler" on the other hand is the
punishment cell, and there are numbers of them on various floors. I
understand they are cutting down on the number of "coolers" and putting
just one on each floor, where a recalcitrant one will be kept in
solitary for brief periods, until she "cools off."

I heard various stories of padded cells, of cells with only ventilating
systems, no window, no open bars, where a girl sits in the dark; of
cells where water can be turned on in some kind of sprinkler system to
assist in the process of cooling off. I heard of girls being thrown
naked in these cells on the pretence that they might use some article of
clothing to make a rope to hang themselves. I heard of girls breaking
the crockery bowls, and using the shards to try to cut their throats or
their wrists. I heard of girls trying to hang themselves by their belts.
But I know none of these things of my own knowledge. I did see, from the
open elevator door, as we journeyed to and from clinic or workshops, the
gruesome steel plated barred doors of these same punishment cells. Most
cells for the 500 or so prisoners, or girls held in "detention," are
cemented and tiled half way up the front, and then barred to the
ceiling; about ten bars across the front of the cell, perhaps five bars
to the gate which is so heavy one can hardly move it. It is the crowning
indignity for the officer to shout, "close your gates," and to have to
lock oneself in. It is not open enough for air, since the cots are low,
but the open bars at the top enable one to call the guard, to call out
to other prisoners, to carry on some friendly intercourse. The cooler is
meant to be a place of more severe punishment than the cell, of course,
so it is completely closed in.

"Tell how we are treated," they cried out to me. I can only tell the
things that I have seen with my eyes, heard with my ears. The reports of
the other prisoners will not be considered creditable. After all they
are prisoners, why should they be believed? People will say, "What,--do
you believe self-confessed thieves, prostitutes, drug addicts, criminals
who are in jail for assault, for putting out the eyes of others, for
stabbings, etc."

It is a little too much to believe perhaps that twenty girls have died
there in the house of detention, from the cold turkey cure these last
two years, as one inmate charged. But there are those ominous stories
which appeared in the New York Times, and in other New York papers too,
of a Dr. Mary Foldvary, 62 year old refugee physician in the Women's
House of Detention who was arrested on a gold hoarding charge, and whose
activities as a doctor were also looked into at the time. Charges were
made then that several girls had died in the House of Detention. Nothing
has been heard of this case since then but I remembered it when I heard
one young drug addict tell the story of a girl who died in the cell,
after her "cellie," as the room mate is called, had cried over and over
again for the officer to come and administer to the sick girl. When the
doctor finally came hours later after the cells were unlocked, she was
assaulted by two prisoners and her head poked down the open toilet,
which one of the prisoners kept flushing in an attempt to drown the
doctor. "Her head shook from that time on, as though she had palsy," one
of the other girls said.

Again, I repeat, these are tales I heard told and repeated and they may
be legends, but legends always have a kernel of truth.

Ill treatment? How intangible a thing it is sometimes to report.
Whenever I was asked by the officers and captains and the warden
himself, how I was making out,--how I was being treated, I could only
say that everything was alright as far as I was concerned,--that I had
no complaint to make. After all, I was only there for twenty-five days,
what with the five days off for good behaviour. I had no complaint to
make of individuals, and yet one must complain about everything. The
atmosphere, the attitude, the ugliness of it all. "After all, we don't
want to make this place glamorous," the guards said. And how many times
when a prisoner was released did I not hear them say, "You'll be back!"
setting a stamp of hopelessness on any attempt made by the prisoner to
reform. Listening to the prisoners talk about the kick they got out of
drugs, how impossible it was for them to conceive of themselves as
"squares," those who go out to work honestly every day, how hopelessly
they regarded the world outside, which they nevertheless longed for
hourly, made me feel too, that without a "community" to return to, in
the early Christian sense,--it was indeed hopeless.

But in the attempt not to make a place glamorous, there need not be so
many small indignities heaped on each prisoner. Why cannot they be
treated as they are in the Good Shepherd Homes (where they are sentenced
for two years or over) as children of God, and made happy and
comfortable. The very deprivation of freedom is punishment enough. The
breaking of the habits of vice is difficult enough.

On one occasion in the chapel, the catechist said to Deane, "Just look
at that wonderful electric fan! How good they are to you. Such luxury in
prison!" She was speaking lightly, of course, but a prisoner resents
such lack of understanding.

In the past I had received letters from Catholic Worker readers who had
been officers and prison officials which showed the same lack of
understanding and I could only think--what if they were crowded into a
bullpen, a metal cage, awaiting trial, then transported in a sealed van,
with no springs where they are tossed from seat to ceiling in imminent
danger of broken bones, bruised spines, then lined up naked, stripped,
searched for drugs, prodded rudely and even roughly, dressed in garments
inadequate, coming to the knees, scarcely wrapping around one, and then,
every last belonging, from rosary to prayer book and Testament, stripped
from one, transported almost naked to one's permanent cell and there
locked in behind bars. Contemplating our critics, our chaplains, our
catechists under such circumstances, seeing them also shivering nakedly,
obeying blindly, pushed hither and yon, I could not help but think that
it is only by experiencing such things one can understand, one can have
compassion (suffering with) one's brother. How many priests and nuns
around the world have had these experiences in Russia, Germany, Japan,
in our generation? In the face of the suffering of our time one is glad
to go to prison only to share in some small way these sufferings.

Of course our friends and readers will remind us of the torture, the
beatings, the brain washings in the prisons of Russia and Germany. As
for the beatings, third degree methods are generally accepted in our own
land. I have read of them, heard of them from parole officers as well as
from prisoners. In the case of sex offenders, offenses against little
children, brutality is repaid with brutality and with a righteous
indignation which is wrought up to justify it. One social worker said to
Deane about a mother who had burned her child's hand in the fire for
some disobedience, that she deserved the same treatment. One of the
prisoners who was a drug addict told me that she had been so beaten by
members of the narcotic squad to force her to tell where she had gotten
her supply of drugs that they were unable to arrest her for fear they
themselves would be held criminally liable for her condition. Which goes
to show that beating, though accepted in practice, is not accepted in
theory. We profess not to believe in such treatment by our law
enforcement officers. Such treatment is associated with lynch mobs.

Over a year ago, on the front page of the magazine section of the New
York Times there was a long article about the treatment of drug addicts
in Great Britain. There they are not criminals, but patients and are so
treated through clinics and custodial care. Here they are made into
criminals by our methods which make the drug so hard to get that the
addict turns to crime to get it. All criminologists believe that we
should reform our own thinking in this regard. One prison official at a
recent meeting said that nowadays a prison sentence was a life sentence,
on the installment plan. And so it is with drug addicts. The one girl
who told of the beating she received and other horrifying ill treatment
had started to use drugs when she was twelve, and had become a
prostitute at that time also. She had been in prison 16 times since then
and now she was 22. Another 21 year old released the day after we
arrived at the detention house tried to commit suicide within the week
of her release, and after a stay in the prison ward at Bellevue was
brought back to us and was in the hospital ward at the House of
Detention. Prisoners are allowed to have the daily papers sent in to
them, so we all read about the case of Maria. She swore she would try it
again and again until she succeeded. She could not get work, she said,
and she could not get cured. If our judges had hearts of flesh instead
of hearts of stone, they would see this as a case for the Good Shepherd
nuns or a hospital.

Another girl, Hester, 21 years old, on being arrested twisted the wheel
of the car in which the plainclothesman was driving her to the jail and
wrecked the car. The driver was killed and she was being held for
manslaughter. She said that she was so afraid of the "cold turkey" cure
which she had suffered before that she was desperate and did not know
what she was doing.

As for the problem of prostitution, most of the girls openly admitted
it. "I'm a pross," they told us. "I was money hungry. I wanted a car,"
or "I wanted drugs." They were much interested in what Judge Murtagh had
said at a recent conference on the problem, and they had heard of his
book on the subject. They felt the injustice of the women being arrested
and not the men, and they despised the tactics of the plainclothesmen
who solicited them in order to trap them. The grossest and most horrible
misconception held not only by prostitutes but also by some pious people
is that were it not for the lowly prostitute there would be far more sex
crimes. I heard this statement made by Matilda, one of the girls down
the corridor one evening when she was in a quieter and more
philosophical mood. It is an old fashioned notion in a way, since sex
relations have become so easy going in these "post war generations."
Anything goes now, in the world, when there is no accepted religious
practice, when the commandments are not accepted as the law of God. I
have even heard Catholics debating how far one could go, in kissing, for
instance--and this at a Catholic Action conference, in a Catholic
Center. How many Catholics have any concept of purity as a positive
virtue, and relate that purity to marriage relations? We are not a
chaste generation. But what Matilda went on to demonstrate was that
jaded men in their demands on prostitutes wished to explore every
perversion, to the disgust of what society considers the lowest of
women, whores and dope fiends. These are not pretty words nor are they
pretty thoughts. But everything comes out in the open in jail. "The more
I see of men," one girl said, "the more I'd prefer relations with a
woman." And another pretty little thing added wistfully, "I've got to
get used to the idea of men, so that I can have a baby. I would love to
have a baby." Some years ago a good Catholic layman on his return from
Italy said to me, "Prostitution is accepted in Italy. It is legalized.
They regard these things more realistically, and accept it as the lesser
of two evils. Even the theologians justify it as preventing greater
harm, and in a way protecting good women and children."

And yet Cardinal Newman wrote once that not even to save the world, or
to save good women and little children, could a single venial sin be
committed. I spoke of this to Judith Beck, talking of means and ends,
and she reminded me of the Tolstoi tales, "The Godfather" and "What Men
Live By." Tolstoi is always, in these short and wonderful stories,
reminding us that God sees all, can remedy all, can protect all, and so
we can well trust also that if we forego atomic weapons, taking this
risk, God will prevent world disaster. It will not be a Communism that
will prevail, but we who believe. All things are possible to those who
believe. "Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief." But I think also of
our Lord's sad words, "When I come again, think you that I will find
faith upon earth?"

Certainly when you lie in jail thinking of these things, thinking of war
and peace, and the problems of human freedom, jails, drug addictions,
prostitutions, and the apathy of great masses of people who believe that
nothing can be done, I am all the more confirmed in my faith in the
little way, of St. Theresa. We do the minute things that come to hand,
we pray our prayers, and beg also for an increase of faith--and God will
do the rest.

One of the greatest evils of the day is the sense of futility. What good
does it do? What is the sense of this small effort? We can only lay one
brick at a time, one foot of pipeline; we can be responsible for only
the one action of the present moment. But we can beg for an increase of
love in our hearts that will vitalize and transform these actions, and
know that God will take them and multiply them, as Jesus multiplied the
loaves and fishes of the small boy and so fed a multitude.

Next year, perhaps, God willing, we will again go to jail and perhaps
too conditions will be the same. To be charitable we can only say that
the prison officials do the best they can, according to their
understanding. In a public institution they are not paid to love the
inmates, they are paid to guard them. They admit that the quarters are
totally inadequate, that what was built for a House of Detention for
women awaiting trial, is now being used for a workhouse and
penitentiary. When the girls asked me to speak for them, to tell the
world outside about "conditions," they emphasized the crowded and
confined surroundings.

"We are here for years, to work out our sentences, not just for
detention!" Shut in by walls, bars, concrete and heavy iron screenings
so that one's vision of the sky from the roof is also impeded, one's
eyes suffer from the strain. One's nerves clamor for change, for open
air, more freedom of movement.

Over on Hart's Island and Riker's Island the men can get out and play
ball, can work on the farm, in the tree nursery. All around is water and
boats and seagulls, and the beauty of the sea air coming from the
Atlantic. And the women have long been promised North Brother Island, as
a companion institution for them. But there are insuperable obstacles,
seemingly, in the way. Money of course figures largely. There is money
for Civil Defense drills, for death rather than for life, money for all
sorts of nonsensical expenditures, but none for these least of God's
children suffering in the midst of millions who scarcely remember they
are there. The New York Times in an editorial two years ago referred to
the Women's House of Detention as a Black Hole in an editorial so
titled. But nothing is done. "Nothing short of a riot will change
things," the warden told us. Was he perhaps advocating we pacifists
start one?

We are told that the kingdom of heaven must be taken by violence, and we
must use the same forces in combatting such injustices here. If our
readers will pray for the prisoners--if our New York readers, when they
pass the Women's House of Detention will look up, perhaps wave a
greeting, say a prayer, there will be the beginning of a change. Two of
the women, Tulsa and Thelma, said that they never looked out those
bars,--they could not stand it. But most of the other prisoners do, and
perhaps they will see you as you look up. Perhaps they will feel the
caress of your prayer, and a sad heart will be lightened and a
resolution strengthened, and there will be a turning away from evil, and
towards the good, and you will have reached that of God which is in
every man. Christ is with us today, not only in the blessed Sacrament
and where two or three are gathered together in His Name, but also in
the poor. And who could be poorer or more destitute in body and soul,
than these our companions of the last twenty-five days?

Read Liberation
---------------

*P.S. I am writing another article on the Civil Defense Demonstration of
July 12, about those who took part in it, about our work in prison, and
the books we read and the conversions we had, which will appear in the
next issue of LIBERATION. Those who wish a copy or a subscription, write
to LIBERATION, 110 Christopher Street, New York City.*
