% Catherine Odlivak
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1957, 6, 8.

*Summary: A tender obituary of Catherine Odlivak, a Catholic Worker for
many years. She is remembered as someone "unspotted by the world," a
woman of prayer, gentle, someone conscious of God's presence. Keywords:
retreat (DDLW \#732).*

During the month of November we are supposed to remember our dead, and
sometimes the month is a rainy and dreary one, and it is a sad and
mournful duty and brings a pang of the heart, and other times, in the
glories of Indian summer, the flowers and golden warmth of the day and
the cold crisp nights when walking is good, and sleeping is good, we
think not only how good this life is at this dying time of the year, but
also how good God is in His promises and reminders of the life to come.
We who are oppressed with the certainty of dying, are made hopeful by
the assurance that "life is changed, not taken away." The trees after
their radiant promise of the Fall, are dead as dead in appearance, and
then in the spring, year after year, the tender buds come forth again.
We have this promise, repeated over and over again in nature, all the
years of our lives, so how can we be sad?

Catherine Odlivak was one of our number who died this past year and I
would like to write a little about her. We of the Catholic Worker met
her during the days of the retreat at Oakmont, Pennsylvania--those
glowing days when Fr. Hugo and Fr. Farina and Fr. Meenan and other
priests of that diocese used to give retreats during the summer months,
and members of our groups from all over the country used to gather there
and be renewed by the vigor of this teaching. Oakmont is a little town
near Pittsburgh, and after you got off the bus after the long ride from
New York, you took another bus for an hour and at Oakmont got out to
walk up a long road to St. Anthony's village, which was an orphanage for
Italian children, headed by Fr. Louis Farina. 

Nuns and children cheerfully cooperated with these retreats every
summer, and both united to put on the best meals the Village could
muster. There was a big vegetable garden in the back, and an herb
garden, and during the week when retreatants kept a complete silence
from Sunday night until Friday night or Saturday morning, I used to
wander around the orphanage grounds, past the vegetable garden, and
usually I filched a bit of basel to smell and to nibble. One of our
non-Catholic retreatants who came with us, said scornfully, "Here you
are studying how to be detached from the things of this world, and
meanwhile sitting down three times a day to the best meals I have ever
eaten!"
 
We needed the comfort of those meals, the beauty of those surroundings,
because in that great silence which descended upon us, many of us faced
the life of the spirit for the first time, and in the resulting
conversion of heart, were terrified at the prospect of what God might
demand of us. Fr. Farina was especially good at describing the deserts,
the tunnels, the depressions, the dark night of the soul which we might
have to pass through, and perhaps it was his emphasis on St. John of the
Cross that led us to accept with joy the de Montfort devotion to the
Blessed Mother, feeling assured that in her hands, nothing too terrible
could possibly befall us despite the grim picture we summoned up at
Father Farina's words. One of the retreatants commented mournfully,
"you'd think you have to practically go through a nervous breakdown
before you achieve any heights in the spiritual life!" 
 
The fact of the matter was that many had to face up to the kind of life
they were leading--a life very much of this world, filled with love of
self, perhaps even sinful, with strong attachments to the forbidden
samples of love. "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of a
living God." To others who lived in tragedy (I remember especially a
mother with a mentally afflicted son who had tried to kill her and
himself many a time) the retreat with its doctrine of the Cross, "Take
up your Cross and follow Me. . . For my Cross is easy and my burden
light. . . And you will find rest for your souls." Meant that they went
away consoled, finding the fulfillment of the promise.
 
With little Cathie, one sensed that there was never any struggle in the
spiritual life. She accepted it as the bird does the air and the fish
does the sea. It was no rarified atmosphere for her; this atmosphere of
St. John of the Cross, this atmosphere of the Gospel and the lives of
the saints. She never got the spiritual bends from too hasty a change
from one atmosphere into another. One felt that she lived always in the
presence of God. It is amazing how we got to know each other, during
this week of silence, true silence--when the lips never moved except to
recite prayers, to respond to the Mass, to confess one's sins, to recite
the rosary.
 
We were supposed to keep the custody of the eyes too, another kind of
silence and solitude, but one caught oneself gazing at this one or that.
It was humanly impossible not to see those who sat at the table with
one, or that knelt before one in chapel.
 
I can see Cathie especially there. When she came into Church she was
never in haste, but moved slowly, quietly. I did not know then that it
was a severe heart condition that made this necessary. Cathie would
kneel down, bow her head with great reverence, and one could sense her
consciousness of the Presence. One never forgets these things. I can
remember how the girl who kept the pamphlet rack at the Paulist church,
a Jewish Christian by the name of Helen, who at benediction bowed so low
that her head all but touched the floor. Charles de Foucault was
reconverted to the faith of his childhood by seeing Moslems at prayer.
Such an attitude of Cathie's brought before the mind of those who
witnessed it a sense of God's presence, His transcendence, His
immanence. He was closer to us than the air we breathed.
 
I don't know when we all got really acquainted with Cathie. We made a
number of those retreats over the years--perhaps five or more, and some
time during that period Cathie got acquainted with **The Catholic
Worker** and offered her services to us. She was the daughter of a
Slovak miner of Pennsylvania, and in order to get her schooling, had had
to hire herself out to a farmer some miles away from her home, at the
age of twelve. She had done heavy farm labor all the years that she was
going to school, and her hands still bore witness of it. Farm labor.
Household labor. Scrubbing and washing clothes, bending that strong
young back under burdens truly too heavy for her to bear. Because the
fact of the matter was that her terrible heart condition meant she
always in a way was living in the presence of death. She continued her
schooling to learn shorthand and typing in order to be able to do
lighter work, and it was in the capacity of stenographer that she
offered herself to us.
 
We were living on Mott street at that time, and the rear house was
devoted to men, all five floors, four rooms on a floor. In the stores of
the front building we had our kitchen and dining room and the place for
the breadline and also our offices. There still remained some of the
Italian families who had lived in this house all their lives and they
occupied the apartments on the second, third and fourth floors. We had
all of the top floor and one apartment on the third. Here I had the
front room. Next to me there was an old lady whose clothes were all held
together with safety pins and who was a scavenger during the day. (We
had a hard time detaching her from her hauls.) Then came Annabelle's
little room and in back of that little Cathie's. There was an extra bed
in that room for the unforeseen guest. Cathie kept the place spotless.
It was freshly painted, the beds were covered with white spreads, and
many a time, at any hour of the night or day, I used to come upon
Cathie, kneeling by her bed, praying, or reading her New Testament. It
seemed to be more natural to her to kneel than to sit. She was earliest
at Mass each morning, and most faithful about her duties. None ever
heard her utter an unkind or a harsh word--she was all gentleness. There
was no gloominess about her either, when she smiled or laughed her eyes
crinkled up, and many a time during conferences, even in the chapel at
Maryfarm or Peter Maurin farm, when the priest said anything startling
or humorous, she used to laugh out loud delightedly. She made all our
retreats and loved our conferences and what she got there was reflected
in her life.
 
I can remember one of her works of mercy. We had a woman with us, very
brilliant and lively, who was going through a mental breakdown. We were
trying to get her to go to the hospital willingly but were meeting with
much resistance. She had gotten to the stage when she was talking night
and day and had all kinds of delusions. She insisted on being active,
and in giving out clothes to the needy, she gave away her own, little
Cathie's or any others she could get her hands on. Indeed she didn't
hesitate to strip herself, take off her own dress, at the expense of
modesty, in her attempt to clothe the naked. She had the extra bed next
to little Cathie, and I can still hear Cathie's gentle quiet voice
persuading her to go to sleep. How could we have done without her help!
She was an example to us always. (The woman did go to the hospital, and
did come out cured almost a year later, but this is not her story but
Cathie's.)
 
The time came when our activities were too much for Catherine, and she
had to find easier work and quieter living conditions. She needed, too,
to follow a very strict diet because of her condition. So she moved
around the corner from us on Hester street, to a little rear house with
a two-room apartment one flight up, and there she painted and polished
and made a little oasis of peace for herself, in the midst of that very
noisy neighborhood. She had a half time job, and worked only enough to
get the little she needed to pay her \$12 a month rent and the kind of
food she needed. (She was fiercely independent, and was more apt to
bring us food than take any from us.
 
She was not alone in the world and had visitors from her family as well
as from **The Catholic Worker** family she adopted. There were married
sisters and her mother and father still lived on a little farm in
southern Ohio. Sometimes she could go home to visit them. She worked for
a time with the Legion of Mary in Transfiguration Parish, but soon that
too was too much for her. Her condition, as she got older, was worse,
and she had several periods in the hospital. At last the doctors said
that it was necessary for her life, that she allow them to perform an
operation, a very difficult and dangerous one. Her heart, they
explained, due to its faulty structure, had to work twice as hard as
anyone else's, so that it were as though it was eighty years old
already. She was getting progressively weaker and would become a
complete invalid for the few remaining months of her life. So she
consented to the operation. Everyone loved her, and wanted to help, so
many from the parish and from **The Catholic Worker** went to the
hospital to give their blood, but it was to no avail. She died under the
operation. The last words she wrote were on a little tablet by her bed.
"Be kind to the sick, and you are being kind to God." She asked to be
buried in our plot in the fields in back of St. Joseph's Church in
Rossville, near the Peter Maurin Farm, on Staten Island. The grave was
dug by Mike Fitzgerald, Charles Butterworth, Stanley Vishnewsky and
others, and there she rests beside little Charlie Smith and Philip
Millions, a child whom she loved, and an old poor man, to whom she was
always pitiful and kind. May she rest in peace, and pray for us, this
little Cathie Odlivak who was so unspotted by the world.
