% On Pilgrimage - March 1960
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1960, 1, 6.

*Summary: Describes her travel tips on a journey to Chicago. Visits her
childhood street and reminisces on their poverty, learning to pray, and
her vocation to poverty. Tells of a picket line in support of a tax
resister and defends their use of the name Catholic. (DDLW \#762).*

I arrived in Chicago at two in the afternoon, and it was good to see
Nina Polcyn waiting for me at the train as I got off. I am carrying too
much luggage, what with a briefcase, big suitcase and over-the-shoulder
bag which is always full. The shoulder bag has lunch in it, powdered
coffee, toilet articles, a kimono, diary, short breviary, New Testament
and a missal. I do not see how I can do without any of them, coffee
included, and Ammon would laugh at that. He is always talking about
these people who can't start the revolution without an aspirin and a cup
of coffee.

My briefcase is always full. It is an old black one, nice and soft with
use, and as it was ripped open on the sides, Mary Hlebein of Maryhouse,
Little Canada, sewed it up for me with her strong hands. She said it
reminded her of her farm mother sewing up her brothers' and sisters'
ripped shoes. Mary reminds me of the women in *O Pioneers* or *My
Antonia*, of Willa Cather. The briefcase has one strap of blue plastic
and one broken off short leather strap. It is filled with
correspondence, manuscript, clippings, pamphlets, a few books, and I am
always thinning them out and sending them back home for our library.
Valuable material and good for the archives.

It is always wise to carry a big enough suitcase to sit on while you
wait in line for a bus. Also to have one big enough so the driver does
not make you carry it inside the bus, lifting it up high steps, and then
again into a high rack. I have learned all these little comforts through
long experience. As to bus riding, I am sure I would have been more
comfortable coming from Fargo on a bus than I was on the old car added
to the half-empty train, the Empire Builder. Instead of having one of
those seats with leg rests and foot rests, with plenty of room between
chairs, I was put in a car with crowded old seats, broken-down, and
over-heated. It was no better than the Pennsylvania trains between New
York and Washington. But I got here quickly, and that is why I had taken
the train, in order to see Ammon again before he went to Notre Dame and
Purdue, and to have a visit with Fides Publishing House who are bringing
out my THERESE in the fall.

Nina and I went to the St. Benet Book Shop on South Wabash long enough
to see if there was mail, and to pick up some of Nina's "home work"
before we went to her apartment at Thirty-third street and South Park, a
great block of buildings, with sixty five per cent Negro families. It is
called Lake Meadows and was built by the New York Life. There is another
project going up called Prairie Shores which is 35 per cent colored and
seventy five per cent white, which is swankier, Nina said. Gordon Zahn
lives in the same block as Nina and our old friend Don Klein who spent
some time with us on Chrystie street, and wrote an article about us in
Milwaukee, is part of the management in this project, where he lives
with his wife and children. There are twelve buildings in the block and
five thousand people in them and there are great spaces all around and a
vast view of the lake and sky, and the buildings are so far apart that
this expanse is not obscured. Right now however, a thick fall of fine
snow is coming from the east, and whereas before I could sit and look
out at the lake, slate-grey yet clear so that I could see the horizon
and the water towers far out, now a dizzying whiteness fills the air,
and sky, lake and buildings are all obscured. It is good to be inside,
no engagements, and time to sit at the typewriter and catch up on this
travelogue.

But I am glad it was so clear yesterday, because Nina drove me along
Cottage Grove Avenue to 37th street where the Day family lived when we
came east after the San Francisco earthquake. It is still there, that
long block of flats, three stories high, and there is still the
apartment with one window looking out to the lake, where my sister and I
used to draw pictures, and write stories and dress our dolls. It is a
solid colored neighborhood now but then it was all white, and our school
was the Doolittle school where I had a fine teacher in fourth grade who
made school stimulating for us all. There was a little Episcopalian
Church where I learned to pray the Psalms and the minister's name was
Wilson and he had a daughter by the name of Dorothy too.

It makes me realize what a hard thing, what a supernatural thing a
devotion to voluntary poverty is, when I remember how snobbish I was at
the age of eight. I was much ashamed of the house in which we lived, and
used to walk down the street with my little school friends who lived on
Ellis Avenue and duck into the apartment house on 37^th^ street,
pretending to live in that more respectable building instead of in a
flat over a saloon and a row of stores. One could go out the back way
and up the back porches to one's own apartment that way and all the
buildings were owned by the same man. The laundries in the apartment
house were used by the tenants on Cottage Grove avenue as well as in the
higher priced house.

What a suffering children grow go through over clothes and appearance!
And yet how happy I was the year I lived there. There was a row of
Stevenson and Dickens and Poe on the mantelpiece and my father would not
allow any newspapers or magazines in the house. There was no radio or
television then. We had to buy on the installment plan, having lost
everything in the earthquake, and that was a shame to my mother. Our
beautiful old things, which had followed us from Bath Beach, New York
"around the Horn" we used to say, to California, had all been sold to
get us east and to give my father a new start. He did not go to work
right away, but wrote a novel and short stories and we had our first
taste of poverty there. It was there too that I first began to pray, on
my knees by the side of my bed at night, because I had seen Mrs. Barrett
playing, and her little daughter Kathryn and Mary Harrington had
introduced me to the Blessed Mother and the lives of the saints.

I am glad the house is still there and I should have liked to go up and
see the back porches where we spent so many happy hours, and the kitchen
which my sister and I used diligently to scour, after we had read the
Polly Pepper books and got a little philosophy of poverty and of work.

If I lived now in Chicago, I would like to live there in that same
place, which is a slum most certainly. Or one could take one of those
little houses and do much with it to bring beauty and simplicity there,
the beauty and simplicity which are part of the poverty exemplified by
the Little Sisters of Jesus over on West Adams street, in their third
floor tenement apartment.

Of course I am enjoying mightily the comfort of this great block of
buildings on 33rd St. which is interracial and most successfully so,
and I feel that all families should have the conveniences and comforts
which modern living brings and which do simplify life, and give time to
read, to study, to think and to pray. And to work in the apostolate too.
But poverty is my vocation, to live as simply and poorly as I can, and
to never cease talking and writing of poverty and destitution. Here and
everywhere. "While there are poor, I am of them. While men are in
prison, I am not free." As Debs said and as we often quote.

Nina is doing a wonderful job of integrating cult, culture and
cultivation, the synthesis which Peter Maurin was always talking about.
Her shop is always my headquarters in Chicago, and it is there people
come together, from there ideas are spread, people are brought together
in all branches of the apostolate. She is as much a Catholic Worker as
ever and her works of mercy reach out in all directions. She has an
understanding of poverty and of destitution and always a readiness to
share in the one and to alleviate the other.

When we got home from our little tour of the neighborhood and I had
explored the view from the eleventh floor, Ammon came for supper and
brought us up to date on his journeyings as well as on the news of our
own workers in Chicago. He had no sooner arrived in town on Saturday
when he was called on to picket in front of the courthouse for Roseanna
Robinson. They are keeping up a vigil night and day, people joining for
a stint of three hours at a time. I certainly hope to join them sometime
these next few days. Roseanna is a young colored woman who had refused
to pay any income tax 85 per cent of which goes for war, or to file any
returns. She had been given an indeterminate sentence and she is now for
two weeks on hunger strike. I suppose they will forcibly feed her. The
newspapers are paying little head to this, so it is necessary to have
the picket line, and Karl Meyer has gotten out a leaflet which is signed
by The Catholic Worker, 164 West Oak street and the War Resisters League
which takes in all those who are not Catholic who wish to participate
but might hesitate if it were only under Catholic leadership.

Already there have been complaints and the Chancellor of the diocese has
telephoned the headquarters telling them to take the name Catholic off
their headquarters and literature.

Fr. LaFarge, in his latest book said that one of the evils in the church
(which our Lord compared to a net filled with good and bad fishes and a
field filled with tares as well as wheat) was a bullying clergy and a
fearful laity. Those are not the exact words but I hope I am not
misrepresenting his idea. Certainly the Monsignor in this case was
abusive and domineering in his telephone conversation, but Karl who is
anything but fearful, submitted cheerfully and now the house is called
St. Stephen's House, since St. Stephen was the first disciple to serve
tables. As for the leaflet which was being distributed, the new edition
was to be signed "friends of Roseanna Robinson."

I had also been reading Evelyn Waugh's life of Ronald Knox as well as
glancing through Fr. LaFarge's, and in the book on Fr. Knox, I began to
get a glimpse of what was meant by various priests who felt that we
should not use the name *Catholic Worker.*

According to Waugh, Knox was the fourth chaplain at Oxford, and whereas
the others had called themselves Catholic chaplains of Oxford, he always
was so exact as to term himself the chaplain of the Catholics at Oxford.
When the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists started years ago, the
chancery office in New York saw to it that they did not call themselves
The Catholic Association of Trade Unionists.

The Catholic Association or The Catholic Worker sounds official, as
though we were speaking for all Catholic trade unionists, or Catholic
workers. Karl Meyer got this point right away, where as it took me years
to understand the objection to our using the name. After all, we have
the right to use it as well as the Catholic War Veterans, I used to say.
Karl said, "After all, there are only two or three of us at Oak street
doing this work, and even those who help feed and house the poor may not
agree at all with us on pacifism or on the demonstrations and jail
going, and giving out leaflets. We are certainly not *the* Catholic
worker in the broad sense."

Some few months ago we were accused before some Congressional Committee
of usurping the name Catholic, and the statement was made that the
Cardinal had threatened to take us to court to make us change it. And
also it was implied that we were not good Catholics at all, otherwise we
would not be pleading for such prisoners as Martin Sobell. We were
pleased to see that James Carey, one of the vice presidents of the CIO
came to our defense. Certainly Cardinal Spellman has never spoken to me
on the subject, and in all 27 years of our existence, he has given us
absolute freedom and shown us courtesy and kindness.

But I begin to get the point, and I am glad to see that Karl was so
agreeable about it. We do not represent the Catholic worker. We are
merely a group of Catholic Workers (and not manual workers at that) who
are trying to express a Catholic point of view, one of many Catholic
opinions. We cite our authorities, for instance, in our stand on peace,
--Archbishop Roberts, S. J.; Dom Bede Griffiths; O.S.B.; Canon F. H.
Drinkwater; Fr. Franziskus Stratmann, O.P.; Mgr. Ottaviani, Cardinal
Secretary of the Holy Office; Pere Regamy, O.P.; etc. etc. But the vast
majority of Catholics have not begun to think on these things yet. A
thousand years are as one day in the sight of the Lord, and Christianity
is only two days old.

Next issue: Interview with Archbishop Roberts, S.J. now lecturing at
Gonzaga University, Spokane, Washington; visits with the Sioux Indians
in South Dakota, and brief mention of settlements and work for the poor
along the way.
