% This Money is Not Ours
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1960, 1.

*Summary: Explains their position on usury and derides the profit
system. Says they try to withdraw from "THE SYSTEM" by following Matthew
25. Keywords: work (DDLW \#768).*

City Treasurer: 
Dear Sir,

We are returning to you a check for $3,579.39 which represents interest
on the $68,700 which we were awarded by the city as payment for the
property at 223 Chrystie Street, which we owned and lived in for almost
ten years, and used as a community for the poor. We did not voluntarily
give up the property--it was taken from us by right of eminent domain
for the extension of the subway which the city deemed necessary. We had
to wait almost a year and a half for the money owed us, although the
city permitted us to receive 2/3 of the assessed valuation of the
property in advance so that we could re-locate. Property owning having
been made impossible for us by city regulations, we are now renting and
continuing our work.

We are returning the interest on the money we have recently received
because we do not believe in "money-lending at interest." As Catholics
we are acquainted with the early teaching of the Church. All the early
Councils forbade it, declaring it reprehensible to make money by lending
it out at interest. Canon law of the Middle Ages forbade it and in
various decrees ordered that profit so obtained was to be restored. In
the Christian emphasis on the duty of charity, we are commanded to lend
gratuitously, to give freely, even in the case of confiscation, as in
our own case--not to resist but to accept cheerfully.

We do not believe in the profit system, and so we cannot take profit or
interest on our money. People who take a materialistic view of human
service which to make a profit but we are trying to do our duty by our
service without wages to our brothers as Jesus commanded in the Gospel
(Matthew 25). Loaning money at interest is deemed by one Franciscan as
the principal scourge of civilization. Eric Gill, the English artist and
writer, calls usury and war the two great problems of our time.

Since we deal with these problems in every issue of THE CATHOLIC WORKER
since 1933--man's freedom, war and peace, man and the state, man and his
work, and since Scripture says that the love of money is the root of all
evil, we are taking this opportunity to live in practice of this belief,
and make a gesture of overcoming that love of money by returning to you
the interest.

Insofar as our money paid for services for the common good, and aid to
the poor, we should be very happy to allow you to use not only our money
without interest, but also our work, the works of mercy which we all
perform here at the headquarters of THE CATHOLIC WORKER without other
salary or recompense than our daily food and lodging, clothes, and
incidental expenses.

Insofar as the use of our money paid for the time being for salaries for
judges who have condemned us and others to jail, and for the politicians
who appointed them, and for prisons, and the execution chamber at Sing
Sing, and for the executioner's salary--we can only protest the use of
our money and turn with utter horror from taking interest on it.

Please also be assured that we are not judging individuals, but we are
trying to make a judgment on THE SYSTEM under which we live and in which
we admit that we ourselves compromise daily in many small ways, but
which we try and wish to withdraw from as much as possible.

Sincerely yours, 

DOROTHY DAY 

Editor, The Catholic Worker
