% On Pilgrimage - May 1961
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1961, 3, 7.

*Summary: Amidst the turmoil of world happenings and the immediate
demands of people, all the apostolic works must go on--picketing, going
to jail, visiting the sick and the prisoner, speaking, writing, praying,
cleaning, cooking. . . . (DDLW \#782).*

To try to write, to continue to write the account of my travels, once
having come home is all but impossible. It is like sitting down to
meditate in the middle of Times Square. Everyone is talking about Cuba,
about the invasion which failed, about the picket line and fast which is
taking place in Washington before the Central Intelligence Agency
building and because of which Robert Steed is now spending ten days in
jail in Washington with David Dellinger and others. Their hunger strike
is continuing and is a protest against the activities of the CIA.

So many things are happening in the world and we are brought so close to
them by newsprint and radio and television (ours does not work) that one
feels crushed, submerged by events. The Eichmann trial goes on and
crushes us with its horror and one realizes that mankind, as Cardinal
Newman writes, is implicated in some terrible aboriginal calamity.

It was a comfort to come across a quotation of Luther (from a Catholic
article), "If I knew the world were coming to an end tomorrow, I would
still go out and plant my three apple trees today."

Thinking of this, it is good to see the work of St. Joseph's House of
Hospitality go on in New York, to come home to find Millie washing the
windows of the store front, behind which a stray cat sleeps by the
statue of St. Joseph and the bouquet of forsythia, a bright yellow
promise of warmth to come. To see Mike going after bread and fish, and
Dianne and Stuart in the kitchen between all their other chores,
preparing the evening chowder. To see the clothes being given out, and
the old and the sick, the lame, the halt and the blind, in all senses of
the word thronging our as usual miserably inadequate house which is now
at 175 Christie Street.

I got back in time for the air raid drill, which took place with City
Hall Park thronged, with thousands put under arrest and only fifty taken
away (more than ever before). Those of us from the Catholic Worker were
not taken except Philip, a friend of Ned O'Gorman's who is working with
us for a time. The eight women of the fifty, mostly from the American
Friend's Service Committee, were tried, and four accepted three day jail
sentences and the others paid a fifteen dollar fine. The rest await
trial.

So each are planting their apple trees, -- whether it is taking care of
children, cooking meals, going to jail (offering up one's life for one's
brother by this voluntary suffering).

As for me, my speaking trip is not yet over, as I must go back to
Detroit for four days and then to my daughter in Vermont. She has been
ill with flu and some miserable side effects and I shall stay for a
week. When I called long distance, which costs sixty cents from New
York, I heard from Becky, who is now sixteen, that Tamar had gone with
Nickie to confession (he is being confirmed tonight) and that Hilaire
had cut his foot very badly in the barn and that it had required many
stitches and I suppose a tetanus shot, all of which meant extra trips in
the 1949 car which used to belong to Judith Gregory and which now does
the Hennessy errands. With nine children, husband working away from home
for the time being, and a 25-acre farm, Tamar does not have time to
think of world events. The world in microcosm is right there with her.
David is clerking in a hotel in Bellow Falls, 35 miles away, and gets
home two days a week. The children are all well and in spite of this
latest mishap, there are only the usual colds and cuts to worry about.
The children of course have been of great help. Even Hilaire, age four,
is "such a little man," his mother says, "that he can manage the cow all
by himself." I suppose that means taking the cow and heifer out to the
pasture and watering and feeding them. I have seen how he carts in
armloads of wood until the kitchen floor is covered, strutting with
chest pushed out in his manliness. The kitchen range and the Franklin
stove in the living room are well provided for.

As for mail
-----------

Mail is piled up both in suitcase, as yet unpacked, and here in the
office and I beg the indulgence of our friends and readers. Some mail
needs only to be acknowledged but many letters need much longer replies,
and I will get at them later. I have the promise of help from a friend
who knows shorthand and is an expert secretary, and we will start to
diminish the pile. We owe our deep gratitude to all those who answered
our appeal for help which we always send out in March, and we must
thank**Jubilee**, too, for reprinting it. I owe them an article on
Christian Anarchism and am looking forward to a quiet time on the beach
when I can catch up with writing. Because after all, writing is the
equivalent of three apple trees.

Traveling
---

Since the book I am writing is a kind of travelogue, I can give a brief
resume of my trip. I drove from Tucson to Yuma to El Centro and to San
Diego. The material I gathered about the agricultural workers and the
early spring lettuce strike, in the Imperial Valley, I will use in a
later article. I spoke in San Diego at the home of friends, and later in
San Bernardino. I drove to Fresno where I saw the unbound copies of
Peter Maurin's book, **The Green Revolution**, and as soon as the
hundred copies we ordered arrive, we will send out the copies our
friends have asked for. I drove on to Stockton and to Tracy where I
stayed with dear friends, the Orbin Brickey's. I did not see Fr.
McCullough because he had been transferred to St. Mary's in Oakland, and
Fr. Burke was taking his place. I had a good visit with Fr. McDonald in
San Jose and attended a conference with him of union people and growers
and others interested in the agricultural situation in California. I
spoke at San Jose State College and Leland Stanford University and at
the University of California at Berkeley and to other groups too
numerous to mention. I went at four a.m. to Skid Row in Stockton to the
shapeup of agricultural workers where there is evidence of a
manufactured shortage of labor in order that the growers may continue
importing agricultural labor from Mexico. I spoke to the students'
committee on Agriculture who came out to the Christo Rey center at Tracy
to go out on the shapeup and spend a day in the fields. I met other
students who worked long hours and spent the summer at this work,
showing that it can be done by local labor, provided the pay is enough
to support life and family.

St. Andrew's Priory
-------------------

I spent the latter part of Holy Week at St. Andrew's priory and met some
old friends there. Fr. Joseph Woods, our old friend from Portsmouth
Priory, who is now in North Carolina, had lived in Southern California
and is responsible in a way for the founding of this Benedictine Center
which is in its beginning but is growing rapidly to fill the great need
for such a center in Southern California.

During Holy Week I read some of **Son of the Church** by Louis Lechet,
Fides, '56, on the apostolate. "The more we went on, the more apparent
it became to us that apostolic action, to keep its balance, without
ending in exhaustion or becoming lost in incoherence, needs all the
reflection of theologians, the whole light of revelation, the entire
movement of grace, the labor of all others, the prayer of all the
saints, and finally the life of the whole church." I sat out in the
desert and read, too, from **Seeds of the Desert**, by Father Voillaume,
his wonderful chapters on Prayers. He quotes "Listen to these wise words
of Gandhi's: 'Whether you wet your hands in the water basin, fan the
fire with the bamboo bellows, set down endless columns of figures at a
desk, labor in the rice field with your head in the burning sun and your
feet in the mud, or stand at work before the smelting furnace, so long
as you do not do all this with just the same religiousness as if you
were monks praying in a monastery, the world will never be saved."

I visited a prisoner on Death Row in San Quentin, the client of one of
our old friends who had had no visitors since his imprisonment two years
ago, who has been brought to the verge of death several times only to
have the execution stayed at the last minute. He told me they are locked
in their cells twenty hours out of the twenty-four, and released for
four hours of exercises around the corridor, that there is no Mass for
the prisoners on death row, but that they can receive the Sacrament
every Saturday. He receives, "But I miss Mass," he said. We ask your
prayers for Charles Brubaker who may be dead by the time you read this.

There is much more to write, but I must go to the hospital to visit a
dying friend and back to the office to speak at our usual Friday night
meeting, in a place which is as poor as any place I visited. We are
swamped by the demands made to us and overwhelmed by the thought that
with all the human needs, of housng and clothing and medical care and
education and spiritual care to be provided, there should be any
unemployment today.

Well, as Peter Maurin would say, in the face of the joblessness, "fire
the bosses, there is plenty of work, and God will provide our
sustenance." Let us get out and plant our apple trees.
