% On Pilgrimage - September 1961
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1961, 3, 7.

*Summary: On a hot and humid August day she describes their neighborhood
and the many visitors coming and going. Longs for the country and the
beach. Mentions several Workers who participated in freedom rides in the
South as part of the civil rights movement. Mentions several conferences
on third-world development noting that "some kind of ownership which
gives security" is needed in the U.S. as well as elsewhere. (DDLW
\#784).*

The temperature is ninety degrees these days and there certainly has
been a long continuing spell of hot weather. Right now at early morning,
with the apartment door open, there is a current of air and one can
catch a breath. The humidity is high and everything is so damp it is
hard to handle paper or pen and one's reading glasses slide down the
nose and get filmy. Walking down stairs the stair rail is sticky. August
weather, in other words.

During the month we sent out an SOS to friends to help us pay the rent
which comes due in frightening frequency. Now in a few days September
first will be here. Rent for the 175 Chrystie Street place, St. Joseph's
House of Hospitality, is \$275. Then there are rents for all the
apartments, eight or ten of them, I forget which. Hatty and Scotch Mary
have an apartment on Spring Street, and Dianne, Jean, Sharon and I are
on Ludlow. Our places are \$25 and \$21 a month, and our landlord who is
a plumber, generously tells us he will give us a few days leeway. If we
are evicted I understand landlords can charge an increase of 15% of the
new tenants.

Rents and utilities remain our biggest problem. Ed Forand goes
regularly to the market and gets free vegetables and fruits, and of
course we are raising all the vegetables we can eat on the Peter Maurin
Farm.

HOME
----

I am writing in front of the window of the little apartment on Ludlow
St. very much like the apartment I had when the **Catholic Worker**
started so many years ago. There is an ailanthus tree outside the
window, an old tree stripped almost bare of leaves. Two doors down there
are some beautiful maples, doing very well, and occasionally one sees
tenants cleaning up the yard, a little haven of green in this slum area.
It is a deep valley these windows look out on. The buildings are
six-story walk-ups across the yards fronting on Essex street, and the
Ludlow St. buildings are the same.

Essex street is famous for its markets, now under roof but formerly on
push cart; and Ludlow street itself since we have been here, has been
receiving every night great trucks from the south, from Florida, South
Carolina, etc., bearing bushel baskets of small cucumbers and peppers
for the innumerable pickle factories all over the East Side. The smell
is delightful. When I come home from the office about eight at night,
the glaring lights show a scene of unloading and loading. Men and boys
stripped to the waist pass down baskets to others to load on small
trucks to take elsewhere in the city. It is good to have this bright
busy distribution center out in front of the house. Downstairs under me
is a Chinese grocery store, and on the corner a kosher restaurant where
one can get good barley soup, or in hot weather borscht or schav, which
is a green sour-grass soup with sour cream, and served with heavy
pumpernickel bread. Good for hot weather lunches.

Orchard, Ludlow and Essex streets, we report to former East Side
residents, remain the same but further east on Grand street there is one
great cooperative apartment house after another. A few blocks down Grand
is St. Mary's Church, and a few blocks down Essex past Canal and East
Broadway there is old St. Teresa's surrounded by privet hedges and
fronted by small sycamore trees nursed and cherished by the old
monsignor who has presided there for many years.

SUMMER
------

I sit in front of this typewriter to finish a column or so for the CW
before going on retreat over Labor Day with the Charles de Foucauld
secular fraternity at Mt. Saviour, Elmira, New York. It is only grim
necessity which keeps me at this writing. I think longingly of the farm
and the green fields and woods, the cool porch where Classie May sits
with her infant Brenda Lee and sews. Or of the beach where four mothers
and their children are enjoying the salt breezes and bathing, fronting
directly on the water as they are. Here is a delightful letter I
received from one of the Puerto Rican grandmothers who accompanied her
daughter and the children for a ten-day holiday while the poor father
had to stay in the city and work.

"Excuse me for the lateness in writing you this letter. I hope you are
well. I thank you very much for the summer vacation we stayed at your
country. We were there as if we were in Portorican countries. I think
since I am old it is the best week I have gone. I am very glad since I
knew you and if in any time you need me for something, call me."\
 She wrote letters also to Marge Hughes and to one of the other mothers,
Beverley. Summer is our busiest time with visitors from morning until
night and much mail to answer, and it is hard to write articles or do
the rewriting necessary on the book, **Loaves and Fishes**, which must
be in by November first.

Or perhaps we feel overburdened simply because we would like to be
sitting on the beach with the children collecting horse shoe crabs and
whelk's cocoons and other delightful things.

Walter Kerrell lives with the sea in the city by painting the horse
shoe crabs so that they look like masks and he hangs them over the desk
where he works in Chrystie Street. Ed Forand gets his taste of the
country by transporting families to and from the beach every other week.
Stuart Sandberg who has been cooking in a hot steamy kitchen all summer
takes nine boys to the beach for a week end on one occasion, and to
other points about the city for a day's excursion once a week. These are
the small boys who come in to sing compline at night, and who are always
wanting to assist him in the making of stew or soup or dessert. He is
beginning a new project in October. We are renting for $75 a month what
is really a large first floor store house in back of us which is almost
large enough for roller skating or a basket ball court to be used
exclusively for the children, for games, for craft work, and we hope for
catechetical and scripture classes, when we have the accredited people
to teach. Compline itself may be class enough. Dianne Gannon, who does
everything, editing, writing, copying, cooking, taking care of the
little girls who run in and out, is at present at a retreat for the next
ten days at Grailville, Loveland, Ohio. . . . But it's no use trying to
account for everyone on the staff. There are so many comings and
goings.

We went to press August 2 and the next day when the paper was delivered
to be mailed out, it poured rain. Wrote letters all day. Had a visit
from an old Italian doctor from the Bronx, a Waldensian from Florence
who had originally wanted to be a missionary to Abyssinia but had come
to this country instead. He knew the old Italian radicals Arturo
Giovannitti, and Carlo Tresca. He himself recently wrote a book in which
he used many of Ade Bethune's cuts and a chapter about the **Catholic
Worker**, the reprint of the McCloskey article which was part of a
thesis for a degree at Harvard. While the doctor was there, Fr. Plante,
S.J. who is vacationing in New York by giving another priest a vacation
elsewhere, came in on his afternoon off and as usual we had a most mixed
group of visitors. Sometimes the acquaintances made at the CW become
lasting friends. August fourth was the first Friday and I went to Mass
with Mary Hughes and my own grandchild Sue who visited us for two weeks
this summer. Becky had had her vacation on a summer job of a month at
Winooski Park, Vermont where she helped the nuns feed a summer school
for foreign students conducted by St. Michael's College. Vacation! I can
hear her exclaim. But she did have fun. She earned sixty dollars which
came to her all in a chunk since the sisters, French Canadian, would not
let the girls out of their sight to spend any money or go to the movies.
But she saw **Death of a Salesman** played by the troupe from the
Catholic University which had a workshop there, and she, and Mary and
Sue and I who had come to call for her, heard a pre-Mozart opera, **The
Servant Mistress**, which was completely delightful.

But I am ahead of my diary which informs me that on Saturday August 5 I
drove to Pottsdown, Pennsylvania to speak at Fellowship Farm, which with
Fellowship House of Philadelphia was started by Marjorie Penny. (It was
there I first met Charles Butterworth, who now bears the burden of
managing the House of Hospitality in New York.) I spoke two hours
Saturday afternoon, two hours Sunday morning and two hours Sunday
afternoon, roughly speaking. The drive home at night to Staten Island
over throughways which made night driving simple was exhausting but a
night at the beach was a renewal of strength, and a delight to wake up
to the sound of little summer waves and the smell of the shore.

LLEWELLYN SCOTT
---------------

One of the highlights of that week end was meeting our dear friend
Llewellyn who has been running the three houses called Blessed Martin
House of Hospitality for almost twenty years now in Washington, D.C. He
is looking for another center as the city is taking over the houses in a
slum clearance program. He told us about an incident in his youth when
he with two other government employees had been driving through the
south on a vacation. We had been talking of Freedom Rides and that was
how he came to tell us how they had tried to sleep in the car, not being
able to get any other accommodation, and when a white policeman shone a
flash light in their faces and called them "niggers" Llewellyn's first
reaction had been to shout "Kill 'em," very vociferously and repeatedly.
His two companions calmed him, and the three had to submit to arrest and
confinement for a few days in a local jail until they could be
identified as government employees from Washington.

"And it wasn't only the white man I wanted to kill," Llewellyn said
with a big grin. "It was also the colored woman who brought us our meals
and treated us worse than the policeman did. I just threw those meals
back at her."

Llewellyn has achieved such a position of prominence in the mind of the
Church, and has been given honor by both secular and religious press and
we were enchanted by this revelation of high spiritedness. "It's taken
me a long time to learn to love my brother," he laughed. "Yes, the
**Catholic Worker** ideas changed a lot of things for me. I don't call
myself a pacifist yet but I guess I am."

Another good meeting at the farm was with Fr. Albert Clappert of
Belgium, a member of the order of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, who is
most interested in interracial work and who would give anything to go on
a Freedom Ride. But it is a layman's work, it is for us to fight such
battles. The priests will have the suffering and sacrifice they crave
soon enough and meanwhile they can preach and teach and cry out against
injustice and break the terrible and long silence of acceptance.

GETTING LOST
------------

One enjoyment on that trip was getting lost in Mennonite countryside
because I came off the Turnpike too soon. Pottsdown is near Ephrata, and
the music of that small communistic society is written about Thomas
Mann's **Dr. Faustus**. The program at Fellowship Farm is most enjoyable
and includes much music. After the Saturday meeting and a barbecue
supper half way up a hillside, we went on to the hill top and the sixty
or seventy people participated in a period of silence, looking out over
the fields and woods of the Mennonite country stretching out on all
sides of us. Saturday evening some of us went to the usual country fair
at Boyerstown road and later there was folk dancing. Marjorie told me
about the work of Father Divine in Philadelphia where he is still most
active, running hotels and helpingAfrican students too.

Fellowship Houses have become so widespread that folks come from all
around the country to their meetings, and it was good to meet Susan
Herrmann, a psychology student of Whittier College, California, who had
just come back from one of the Freedom Rides and who told me of the
violence inflicted on women also who had joined the others in this
protest from all over the country, (We are hoping that Philip Havey who
has worked with us since spring here in New York will write of his
imprisonment at Parchman, Mississippi for the last month. He is out on
appeal now and may have to go back to serve another three months.)

PERKINSVILLE
------------

The following Friday I had the joy of a trip to Vermont, returning not
only Sue to her family, but Ellen Paulson to Massachusetts who had been
visiting us for ten days. A bicentennial celebration was going on at
Perkinsville and there was great gaiety, dancing in the square at
Perkinsville and in the basement of the church at Weathersfield which is
just up the road from the Hennessy's. The girls had a good time and one
woman, middle aged, said Susie, danced until she fainted. Such square
dances, four in a row, are violent affairs. But old and young both
danced. Tamar was making pickles and canning and getting food ready for
the deep freeze. Jim and Willi Baker came with all their children and
the three they were taking care of besides while their mother had
treatment in the State Hospital for a short period. There was a picnic
supper, and in addition to the hot dogs and marshmallows (strange
combination), there were a half dozen squirrels taken from the deep
freeze from the hunting season the fall before. The boys have had no
time for fishing, since the last two weeks they had spent at generous
Bishop Joyce's camp at Laka Tara. The priests and seminarians made it a
retreat as well as a vacation, I am grateful to say. The Bakers are one
of my favorite families, and have always exemplified personal
responsibility in acts of loving kindness such as that of caring for
these extra little ones. And all on a modest teacher's salary!

In addition to the supplies for supper and the old fashioned ice cream
freezer which is always the climax of these wonderful cook-outs, they
brought two new comfortable chairs for Tamar's living room. They had
already, in another year, brought her extra beds. The Bakers have bought
a new house already furnished near Mt. Carmel, New York and may they
have a long, happy and healthy life in it.

THE ASSUMPTION
--------------

It took eight hours to drive home, and a leisurely drive at that, coming
down Route five which is the quickest way. The next day was the feast of
the Assumption, which always reminds me of that saying of St.
Augustine's "The flesh of Jesus is the flesh of Mary," and emphasizes to
me the dignity of her humanity, just as the feast of the Sacred Heart
emphasizes the love of God for man. The feast of the Assumption together
with the doctrine of the resurrection of the body makes heaven real, and
goodness knows we need to grow in faith and in hope of heaven in this
perilous life which we nevertheless so treasure and cling to.

READING
-------

I read Edwin O'Connor's **On the Edge of Sorrow**, a truly beautiful
book. If he is as politically perceptive as he is spiritually so, I
shall certainly read his former book, **The Last Hurrah**. It is a far
better book than **The Devil's Advocate** though not so colorful.\
 When it comes to recommending a book which is fascinating in the light
of the present history of Brazil and Cuba, not to speak of all the other
opening-up areas of the world, where men are beginning to realize they
are men and not slaves -- I can heartily recommend **The Missionary's
Role in Socio-Economic Betterment**, edited by Fr. John J. Considine,
M.M., \$1.75, paper back, published by the Newman Press in 1960 and
given me on my last trip by Fr. L. J. Twomey, S.J. of the Institute of
Industrial Relations of Loyola University in New Orleans. If this is the
kind of teaching he is handing out in his Institute I hope he gets the
support and backing to widen his work in this field so important in our
day. Here are a few quotations from it.

"Communal land tenure in Africa." said Joseph Blomjous, Bishop of
Mwanza, Tanganyika, "is a form that in Catholic philosophy is classed as
private ownership of land because it is the ownership of more or less
the extended family living on the land. It is not at all ownership of
land by the State. Naturally with the changing economic and social
conditions in Africa there will be changes which I hope will be slow. .
."

"What we find in many papal documents," states Fr. Edward Murphy, "is
not so much an insistence upon private property as we understand it but
rather an insistence upon some kind of ownership which gives security.
The type of ownership may change from culture to culture. It may be a
communal ownership, which is a perfectly legitimate kind of ownership if
it guarantees the individual farmer security, a means of subsistence and
opportunities for improvement."

There is a good deal of discussion in this book, which is a report of
four days of meetings at Maryknoll in 1958, of "forty Catholic
specialists in problems confronting the less developed areas of the
world. They will seek ways to integrate religious and cultural efforts
in those areas with action in the social and economic fields." The
initiative for the Easter Week Conference came from Rev. Frederick A.
McGuire, G.M., Exc. Sec. of the Mission secretariat of the Catholic
Sending societies, Washington, D.C. and Monsignor Luigi Ligutti. The
Catholic International Rural Life Movement and the Fordham Institute of
Mission Studies were the two sponsoring organizations for the
conference. The participants were twelve lay specialists, thirteen
non-missionary priests and sixteen field missionaries chosen for the
experience. We were glad to see our dear friend R. Marion Ganey, S.J.
among them. He has built up the credit union movement in Honduras, the
Figi Islands and in Samoa.

As one acquainted with the problems of destitution in our own country,
in both cities and rural areas, a great many of these techniques could
be studied to advantage to help sharecroppers, migrants and youthful
delinquents in the cities where the great problem is unemployment and
lack of leadership. I am thinking especially of Puerto Rican and Mexican
peoples who are generally considered Catholic.

CUBA
----

If such directives as this book contains had been used in Cuba there
would be no or should we say, there would be less of a problem about
Church and state in Cuba. We are printing excerpts from an article
either in this month's CW or next, which has already appeared in
**Esprit** in Paris, and was reprinted in translation in **Cross
Currents** in this country, and in **World View**. In view of our 70,000
circulation, and the smaller circulation of the other papers which reach
intellectuals mainly, we are glad to be able to reprint some of this
article which may answer some of the questions or our readers.\

