% On Pilgrimage - April 1963
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1963, 1, 6, 7.

*Summary: Complains about a litter-filled city park, wondering why the
unemployed aren't put to work to beautify it. Receives a gift of Spanish
language lessons and enjoys a visit to her daughter's family in Vermont.
Eulogizes Joe Roach, a long-time resident at their farm--"Joe was
another Lazarus." (DDLW \#801).*

It is the last day of March and the weather is so warm and mild and so
many of us are recovering from the flu that one cannot think of anything
but how wonderful it is to sit on a park bench and bask in the sun.
There should be benches on every street corner in the city. Down in our
Italian section people pull out their chairs and sit out by the curb
where there will be no danger of anything falling from the window sills
of any of the five stories above them.

Children come from school and stop to buy ices, and children fret over
too many clothes. But every now and then as you turn a corner, a wind
springs up and you realize that at sunset it will be cold again. Buds
are coming out on the bushes in the park, and in the swampy sections of
Staten Island as people come to and from the farm, the call of the
spring peepers is poignant.

Across the street from the three-story loft building which is our
office, dining room and all day quarters, the long park which extends
from Houston Street to Delancey which was the result of urban renewal
many years ago and brought the displacement of many families, is still a
shambles. Garbage, tin cans, litter of all kinds and also human beings,
sitting on what is left of a stone wall. Children play in the midst of
this litter. Five years ago we were displaced by the city, because of
the new subway link being constructed from our home at 223 Chrystie
Street, three blocks north of us, and since then the park has been like
this.

So much work could be done there, and nightly we hear about the
unemployment problem among the old and the young, the problems of
automation. But there is no money for the employment of the young or for
more schools or playgrounds. Only for missiles, or for the exploration
of space.

My room mate Marie ruminates on this every night. "Don't you think it's
foolish, spending all this money on space?" she asks me. She used to
gather newspapers from the trash receptacles all over the city every
afternoon and come back in the evening to give us our choice. We didn't
have much choice last month. I ask her for the **Wall Street Journal**,
but she doesn't often get that. The few copies I saw in this time of
dearth fascinate me. One issue told all about how complicated is the
life of Roy Cohn, who prosecuted Hiss and who is or rather was our
staunch defender against communism. He does not have time for that now,
except for an occasional foray into the field to keep his hand in. I
heard him one night shouting down a lawyer from Northwestern University
over the case of Morton Sobell who is still in Atlanta Federal prison.

The lawyer was trying to talk about the legal aspects of the case and
Morton's chances for freedom. Silence would be the only weapon against
such an opponent as Cohn. Any way, his

affairs seem to be very complicated now and he is mixed up in all kinds
of ownership of businesses, all of which was set forth by the **Wall
Street Journal** in a front page right hand column and perhaps a Balzac
could understand it but I could not. Anyway he did not seem to be
prospering along these lines and perhaps that was why he was back on the
radio, to get his hand in, or rather voice in on what had won him
acclaim in the past. Also the Wall Street Journal told of peasant
uprisings in Mexico.

I ask Marie for the **Christian Science Monitor** too, as there are
nature notes, and feature articles about Maine and New England and rural
life which make very pleasant reading in the New York slums. She has the
**Post** now, Murray Kempton doesn't work there any more, but there are
some interesting stories about a woman with eighteen cats and how she
was sent away to a mental hospital, and about a vagrant who was picked
up with \$50,000 on him.

There is always so much happening. But it was too bad about the woman;
with the cats. "I do love little kittens," Marie said. "One time I was
talking with a poor man on the Bowery and he said he did not believe in
God, and I told him that even if I did not go to the Volunteers of
America every Sunday night where they talk to you about God, I would
believe there was a God because he made little kittens. And puppies, and
the birds." There is a pet store on Delancey that Marie stops by every
day.

Things That Happen
------------------

This winter Hattie has died. She was with us probably fifteen years.
Scotch Mary is in Columbus hospital with a broken hip. She fell on the
ice. Mollie got a broken hip too and she has just been operated on for
cataracts in Bellevue hospital. Michele has found herself an apartment.
So has Phyllis, so has Norma. They take in others, too, in emergency.
Millie who does so much to keep things neat around the CW has her little
room and her privacy. Terry and Barbara are in the apartment in front of
us, and Terry Becker will come down from St. Joseph's College to help us
Easter week. That accounts for the women and girls who are with us in
the city. There is also Josephine and the Catherines and Ruth and a
number of others who come in for the day and for meals. Sometimes I
think how few women we have, and then I look around and there are more
than I realized. But there is no one in charge as Julia, or Irene or
Jane used to be. We have no woman's house, as such. We live together in
some cases, or as neighbors, each independent. I keep wishing over the
years that someone would buy a hostel for women where they could get a
dormitory bed for fifty cents a night or a little cell with a door. So
much still to be done. Doesn't some woman want to run an inn by the side
of the road for women who are poor?

Meanwhile
---------

Meanwhile we are getting along very well. I am staying in town and have
done no travelling since Christmas, except for a week end jaunt to
Toronto, a flying trip to Pittsburgh, and one three day visit to Tamar.
The reason for sticking so close to home is that one of the Christmas
presents I received was one hundred lessons in Spanish at the Berlitz
School. What a friend, to give me such a present! And how I have enjoyed
the winter, in spite of being up and down with the flu!

Berlitz
---

For one thing I like the atmosphere of the Berlitz school where you
cannot speak a word of English but must speak Spanish for two hours, a
day with one or another teacher who may be from Spain, Chile or Cuba!
Most of the time I had a teacher from Spain who had traveled and worked
all over South America and Central America, who had fought in the Riff,
who had a most adventurous life and who enjoyed our conversations on
pacifism, anarchism, farming communes, literature and so on. My trouble
is that I think in English and translate, and hear and translate, but I
am getting better, now that I have had seventy lessons. We go through
the lessons in the book and talk about food, travel, the time of day,
the weather, the amenities of life, and then discuss a little of the
news of the day. I am beginning to feel confident that with patience, on
the part of my hearers, and on my own part with myself, I will begin to
understand more quickly.

I already feel at home and enjoy mightily following the Mass each day in
Spanish, in the missal Fr. La Mountain at Holy Crucifix church gave me.
Someone said, that Fr. Louis Merton says, that the Bible in Spanish was
most beautiful.

What cheers me in my study is remembering that Raissa Maritain wrote how
she sat as a little girl, miserable in her French classrooms when her
family moved from Russia to France and how suddenly she began to
understand. And a priest told me that when he was studying in a French
Canadian seminary where they teach in Latin, after agonizing months, he
too began suddenly to understand. This sounds like a miracle to me. But
Lou and Lenna Jones in Cuba said the same. Suddenly, after studying for
months,-- they understood.

There is something about going back to school again which is very
stimulating. From the office, or from our apartments to the Berlitz
school down near Trinity Church it takes only fifteen minutes to ride on
the Broadway bus, and for those who work in the area it is simple. I saw
Chinese, Japanese, French, Germans and Americans all coming in to study.

This week end I brought Mary O'Neil (Roger's Mary) down to the beach
house for a couple of days by the sea. She had been sick in the Woman
and Children's Infirmary and Roger was taking care of the children at
the Glen Gardner community. It was beautiful weather all day from the
early morning "Get up, it is late o'clock," of little Johnny Hughes next
door, until now at sundown. Johnny is wearing his first pair of
suspenders which he calls his "red fenders" and which make him look, he
thinks, like the firemen who came rushing down to the beach tonight to
put out a brush fire just off the road which was threatening the beach
houses. They have been on 450 calls in the last few days, and they look
with dread on the Easter holidays when children will be home, and fires
on the beaches are liable with a sudden shift of wind to bring sparks
into the fields and woods at our end of the island. They blame too many
of the fires on the children and forget the cigaret from the passing
motorist, and the dumping of trash along the roadside, the broken glass
which under the sun's rays starts fires amid the litter and dry grass.
(I look at so much of this from the standpoint of employment and work
teams now, and see so many places which could be made beautiful which
are eye sores now.)

Vermont
-------

I had a lovely visit to Vermont and saw the Hennessy family. All are
well, (our readers demand news of them.) Becky is 18, April third, and
is going to college in the fall. The three oldest grandchildren work
summers at what they can get to do, Becky in a summer resort, Sue
baby-sitting and Eric on a neighboring farm, where he earned his living
last summer, board and ten dollars a month. He shot his first deer in
the middle of the season last fall and Nick is still the best fisherman.

How wonderful these visits. Mary at twelve is the most competent and
reliable of baby tenders, and Margaret reads to all of them, she is ten,
and Martha is helpful in so many ways, sitting on the side of the sink
washing huge messes of dishes for the family of nine children. The older
girls can cook, bake, and do other household chores, but they have heavy
studies. Still Sue gets in a lot of work in the house. And then there
are Hilaire and Katey, who smiles always and says yes! When Nickie was
little he used to say, firmly, "Not me!" but Mary always said, "Me,
too!" Katey is very soft spoken with her little "yes."

"We say prayers in school," Martha and Margaret tell me, "and we sing
our grace at noon. Like this: In the morning it is the Our Father, and
then Teacher reads us a prayer out of a book. She has three books. Then
at noon we sing. 'O the Lord is good to me, and so I thank the Lord for
giving me the things I need--the sun and rain and the apple seeds--O the
Lord is good to me'."

Yes, they have prayer in the little public school in Vermont, and prayer
in the home, and prayer and catechism with the sisters on Saturday
morning.

Post-script
-----------

Joe Roach suddenly died,--one of the men on the farm, just after lunch,
falling in his room by the side of his bed. The priest was called at
once, and the ambulance, but Joe died while the priest was anointing
him, with Jean Walsh, our dear nurse who tends all the sick at the farm
at his side, and Monsignor Dolan, our pastor, saying the prayers for him
of the last great sacrament. He was dead before the ambulance arrived a
moment later.

Joe was one of the poor. He came to us when we had the farm at Newburgh
a dozen years ago. He had a bad back injury when he worked on a farm
upstate and was too crippled to work elsewhere. As far as we knew he had
no compensation of any kind, and as with so many who were with us told
us little of his family. But the police were able to locate a brother
who claimed the body and will bury Joe in Newburgh in the plot of his
family.

Joe was another Lazarus who had little in this life. He was poor in
every way, having nothing of this world's goods, and little health of
body. He had nothing when he died, and it is a humbling thing, going
through the effects of one who has been with us for so long, to see how
little accumulations there were, only the simple needs of a change of
clothing, radio perhaps for the news and the sports, a few paper back
books, a prayer book. He performed his religious duties, he earned his
own living by the sweat of his brow, never failing to put in hours of
work with us, washing pots, doing laundry, and he also served the
poor,--all those who came to the farm in their need, or to conferences,
days of recollection or discussion. As Peter always reminded us, we take
into Heaven with us only that which we have given away in this life, and
Joe had asked little for himself and had given what he had.

Let us pray for him and for all the other poor among our readers,--those
who are poor in bodily health, or soul's health as well as for those who
are poor in this world's goods. May the love and affection Joe so craved
for in this life be his now, "Heaped up, pressed down and running over."
