% On Pilgrimage - July/August 1963
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1963, 1, 2, 7.

*Summary: Goes to Danville, Virginia, and describes the brutality of the
police against demonstrators. Speaks at a spirited prayer meeting
devoted to civil rights. Ties civil rights to education, jobs, health
care, and averting war. Participates in picketing. Says, "We all have
something to give." Notes the death of friends. (DDLW \#805).*

An invitation for me to speak in Danville, Virginia, came last month so
I set out July 8th to fill the assignment. Actually I was not asked as
editor of **The Catholic Worker**, as a writer, a reporter. I was asked
by Mother Teresa of the Society of Christ The King, to come and take her
place because the newly assigned young priest did notthink that it was
fitting that a founder of a religious group of social workers, known for
the past twenty years in the community should be taking her place by the
side of crowd of Negro demonstrators on the steps of City Hall in
Danville.

Mother Teresa had spoken on the radio several times besides. The priest
is the only one for miles around; the next nearest church is Lynchburg,
and it is one of the difficulties of the Church in America, that one is
dependent for the Bread of Life on the one priest who may be completely
hostile to one's point of view. In the big cities this does not matter.
There are a number of priests in each parish and any number of parishes
in each city. But in Danville there is one Catholic Church and one
priest. One wishes to be friends.

The Society of Christ The King
------------------------------

Mother Teresa heads a small group of sisters who do social work among
the poorest of the Negro and white population, town and rural. They do
what comes to hand and if it is a baby, left on their doorstep or a
family of half a dozen children whose mother is in a mental hospital for
five months, or a group of families back in the country to be instructed
in the truths of religion, -- they are ready. While I was with the
sisters, there was a baby, carried about with them, taken to Mass in the
morning, sitting in a little stroller in their kitchen or garden while
they worked.

"We have learned about mothers from them," Mother Teresa says happily.
St. Teresa of Avila advises that every convent have a baby in it to
humanize the nuns.

It is an all day bus trip to Danville. The bus leaves at 8:30 a.m. and
arrives at 8:45 at night with few stops on the way. It is the through
bus to New Orleans. Mother Teresa met me at the station and drove me out
Route 4, down Industrial Avenue, past tobacco warehouses, past a sewage
plant, past a street of shanties and then a row of slightly better
houses, and finally up a rutted road to the top of a hill where the
sisters have put up half a dozen buildings, including a guest house, a
community house, work shops, a library and so on. They began with
barracks and the sisters do the building themselves. A tornado in 1953
destroyed some of their houses, and they are working on another now.
There are fruit trees, a vegetable garden, lovely grounds under a great
spreading oak (many of whose limbs were torn away by the tornado), and
across a little valley, a good barn and milk house. They have two
Guernsey cows, and have an abundance of milk, butter and cream.

Supper Party
------------

It was not long after I arrived that a group of the young people from
SNCC (Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee) arrived for a late
supper. There was Cynthia Ann Carter from Danville; Roland Sherrod from
Petersburg, Va., Ivanhoe Donaldson from New York, Bob Zellner, field
secretary of the Alabama SNCC, Mary Elizabeth King and Sam Shirah from
Atlanta. We ate the good farm products (there were steak and hot dogs
besides) and students told me of the happenings in Danville. Stories of
which had been publicized all over the country, but they still could
scarcely convey the horror of the brutality which had been inflicted on
a helpless, unarmed crowd of demonstrators.

Before I left New York, and it was not too heartening to hear it, Bob
Gore had told other members of CORE that in all the country, the police
of Danville had been the most terrible. And on July 12 Martin Luther
King told a mass meeting in Danville that he had seen brutal things done
by the police elsewhere in the South, "but seldom, if ever, have I heard
of actions as vicious and brutal as those done by the police here." Dr.
King's Assistant, Wyatt Tee Walker, called Danville the worst area with
Gadsden, Alabama and Savannah, Georgia, a close second.

This is what happened the week before:

Riot
----

The group of demonstrators which included prominent ministers and their
wives, parishioners and many young ones, were driven by deputized police
into an alley between a parking lot and the City Hall and there the fire
hoses were turned on them with such force that they were thrown to the
pavement and in one case a woman's clothes, (skirt and blouse), ripped
off her, so that she was exposed with nothing but step-ins and naked
from the waist up. Women taking refuge under parked cars were dragged
out and beaten with clubs and kicked. Arms were broken by the force of
the blows. Men, women and children were all beaten unmercifully and
deliberately. It was fear run riot.

"Deliver me from fear of their fear," I prayed as I listened, using the
words of St. Peter which had been part of the epistle of last Sunday's
Mass, thinking of the hysterical fear of guilty whites, fear of the
past, of the future.

"Trouble was, they deputized untrained policemen, men who were garbage
collectors and street cleaners and other workers for the city," the
students told me, as many others told me again and again. And when they
said "untrained," I thought of what I had read of how police are trained
to strike blows that will not be seen, that will not kill but will
render the opponent unconscious and so on. But these men were striking
as though to kill by their blows and many of the demonstrators had to be
taken unconscious to the hospital. At present writing two are still
there, on in Duke Hospital and one in Richmond.

The local hospital, Winslow, has 25 beds for the colored and the other
hospital in this town of 47,000 has 750 beds for the whites. Winslow is
a city hospital, free, a fact protested by white citizens who point out
that they pay fourteen dollars a day at Memorial which had started as a
hospital for the needy and had been given gifts of a million or more.

Prayer Meeting
--------------

What I was invited to do in Danville was to speak at a mass meeting the
following night in the High Street Baptist Church where Rev. L. W. Chase
is pastor. The meeting began with songs and hymns and the hymn singing
was hearty and beautiful.

"Are we weak and heavy laden, cumbered with a load of care? Precious Saviour still our refuge, take it to the Lord in prayer. Do thy friends despise, forsake thee, take it to the Lord in prayer. In His arms He'll take and shield thee, take it to the Lord in prayer."


There were other hymns and prayers and the invocation was surely a
crying out to the Lord, a singing and a sobbing of a prayer, rhythmical,
so that it became almost a litany. Rev. James Dixon prayed with all his
strength.

And then there were the Freedom songs, many of which have been composed
in jail, coming from the heart, from the suffering, from the open
bleeding wounds of a people who have known indignity and sorrow for
generations.

The Freedom songs were more lively than the hymns and clapping
accompanied them and a light tapping of the feet. **"Keep on walking,
talking â€¦ Ain't gonna let no injunction turn me round, walking up the
freedom way."** There were many verses and many refrains. The singing
lifted the heart, strengthened the weak knees.

Speakers
--------

There were many speakers but they were brief. William Canada told with
complete lack of emotion how he had spent nineteen days in jail.
Authorities kept denying he was there, and he was sought for by his
family in hospitals and there was no knowing where he was until he was
released. Despite beatings he had been put to work in the quarry.

Bob Zellner talked of Moses and how he led his people out of Egypt and
how tired people got of the struggle so that they wanted to go back to
bondage; it was forty years before they saw the Promised Land. And he
compared the non-violent struggle of the Negro to the clamorous attack
made on the walls of Jericho, which, he reminded them, had come tumbling
down.

Claudia Edwards of Arkansas, one of the task force of CORE, urged the
Mothers to join me in a picket line in the down town area the next
morning. She herself, she told me later, was going to buy her some jail
clothes in an adjoining town since they were boycotting the down-town
area in Danville. Jail clothes meant a pair of jeans or dungarees and a
slightly heavier shirt so that if the hoes were turned on them again,
her clothes would not be swept off. I saw her the next day at noon and
she looked small and wiry, and very much alive. The next afternoon she
and a dozen others lay down before the gates of the Danville Mills
against which they are urging a world-wide boycott, and the police let
them lie there and deployed the trucks to another gate. There were not
enough of them to cover all the entrances to these great textile mills
which have subsidiaries all through the South, and a world wide market.
Ten thousand are employed by the Mill and only 500 Negroes.

There were speakers urging registration for the vote, so that next
morning 47 went to the polls and registered, and they went together so
they would not be intimidated. There was only one woman, very nervous,
to register them, so it took a long time, and many could not join our
picket line at the noon hour. The rule is that at first registration,
one pays not only the year's poll tax but for three years previous, and
this added burden keeps many from registering.

Lawyers spoke on the progess made in the courts. Leonard Holt from
Norfolk and Arthur Kinoy from New York, both warned their audience,
(there were five hundred there,) that the work could not just be done in
the courts, that the people had to keep up their demonstrations, had to
continue their struggle in the streets.

Reverend A. I. Dunlap, just recently appointed vice-president of
Kettrell Junior College, made a statement of purpose and since he was
directly in front of me and spoke so that he kept his audience in gales
of laughter I could not get the gist of his talk which was also very
brief.

Pope John and Integration
-------------------------

I was the speaker of the evening and I do not know whether I would have
had the courage to speak, outsider that I was, if I had not been there
to represent Mother Teresa whose work was known and loved by them all.
Besides, the singing lightened my own heart, dissolved my own fear, so
that I could tell them of the Women's Pilgrimage for Peace and the
Pope's encyclical **Pacem in Terris**.

There was no end to what one could say about that Encyclical. There was
the part where he said, "He who possesses certain rights, has likewise
the duty to claim those rights as marks of his dignity, while others
have the obligation to acknowledge those rights and respect them."

I took that statement on a poster placard on the streets of Danville the
next morning when we picketed for an hour and a half before the hostile
or indifferent stares of hundreds of people during their lunch hour.

There was a notable absence of Negroes but some of those who shopped
said they were from the country and did not know about the pleas of
their fellow Negroes to keep out of the downtown area and not to buy
from stores where Negroes were not employed in fair ratio to the whites.

There was much to quote from Pope John: what he had to say about the
rights of conscience; about unjust laws; about the place of women, the
part they had to play in the world.

And I told my listeners too, that after so many years of work in the
Peace Movement, I had come to the conclusion that basic to peace was
this struggle of the colored for education, job opportunity, health, and
recognition as men. That while we talked of averting war, we were in the
midst of one of the strangest wars in history, where the side which had
declared the war were using no weapons but those of suffering. They were
praying they were marching they were doing without (by boycott); they
were in a way offering their own flesh, their suffering, their
imprisonment, for their brothers. "A new **commandment**" (not a
counsel) "I give to you, that you love each other as I have loved you."
And that commandment of Jesus means the laying down of life itself for
one's brother, colored and white.

It is the Negro who is leading the way, and it is among the Negroes that
the ranks of the martyrs is increasing. They are uncounted, unknown,
many of them. Medgar Evers leads them, going out as he did with fore
knowledge of his doom. He fell, and his brother is taking his place.
Others are unknown, unsung heroes. Something is happening in our midst
that we do not recognize. We have eyes and see not, ears and hear not.
The last are becoming the first. "He hath put down the mighty from their
seat and hath exalted the humble."

"Not Worthy"
------------

It is hard to feel that the color of our skin in a way separates us from
this mass of people whom we have injured. It is with too little and too
late that we are engaging ourselves. But even if it is at the eleventh
hour that we are called to serve, we can respond.

We can pray too that we may be "counted worthy to suffer," a fact the
apostles rejoiced over when they put up their non-violent struggle for
the Faith, and were imprisoned and beaten. I felt that I had not been
counted worthy when I learned that the Danville police have been
imprisoning all the pickets since I left, besides all those who have
been engaged in sit-ins. The jails have been filling up.

I talked to some of the women who had been beaten by the police and
their deputies and the savagery was incredible. The only thing they were
speared were the humiliating stripping and searching that all women are
subjected to in the Women's House of Detention in New York.

All ages
--------

On the picket line which I participated in through the downtown streets
of Danville, I was preceded by Mrs. Chase, wife of the minister of the
church where I had spoken the night before, and Mrs. Lawrence Campbell
whose husband is the executive secretary of the Danville Christian
Progressive Association and minister of one of the other leading
churches of the city.

The very young among the Negro students have led in the integrating of
public facilities, lunch counters, hospitals, libraries, theaters and
housing in many places, and have engaged the minds and hearts of youth
in Danville also. It was fascinating to see and hear these young ones,
some of them only fourteen, talk of the work and the struggle ahead.

Just as in Birmingham, many of these young ones have already seen the
inside of the prisons. Comparing them to the gangs of unemployed
teen-agers who are looked upon with fear and trembling by the
householder everywhere, one can only see in these young ardent souls
great hope for the future.

John Davis was one of the first from Danville to take a position of
responsibilities in these activities. In an interview at the office of
**Liberation** in New York, he told how a group of young people were
arrested for trespassing when they sat on the steps of Charcoal House, a
segregated restaurant, after the manager closed the place in the face of
their picket line. When they were arrested there were two news men
present and Chief of Police McCain warned the police to handle their
prisoners with care, but when they arrived in the jail cells where there
were no witnesses they were kicked and "cursed in most vile language."

Ivanhoe Donaldson who drove down from New York was halted by the police
outside Danville and arrested for driving with faulty brakes,
handcuffed, taken to the police station, and struck in the face several
times. Another student from Brandeis University who came to help the
SNCC group was beaten so badly with clubs that Mother Teresa said it was
a wonder he had any sense left. The police kept saying, one of the young
colored girls told me, "Is you a white man or is you a nigger?" and when
he would not answer, they kept beating him.

This same little one, who looked no more than twelve years old, had been
thrown into prison too together with a crowd of others, and "the prison
was so full that they had to put us in the side with the white people,
-- so we integrated the jail!" Truly this is also a children's crusade.
It is not that they have been led into it, -- it is hard to keep them
out.

An Emergency Food Drive has been announced by representatives of SNCC
and the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) in Danville, to help ease
hunger due to the cutting off of unemployment compensation and loss of
jobs which occurred in reprisal for participating in demonstrations.

Parents in Jail
---------------

"There are also many families where one or both parents are in jail, and
they have vowed to remain there without bail. Food is needed for their
children," according to Rev. L. G. Campbell. Staples such as flour,
canned milk, and canned vegetables and meat are needed for immediate
distribution. "We are making a special appeal to all friends of justice
for small and large packages to be sent to 226 North Union St.,
Danville, Va., said Avon W. Rollins, Executive Committee, SNCC.

Besides the relief that is needed and the money for all the expenses and
legal fees of these committees (they are doing a lot of work and not
spending much on literature) there is the problem of the building of a
kind of social order which can handle the problems of automation, the
building of a new society within the shell of the old. The continuation,
in other words, of Peter Maurin's program of Farming Communes and
Agronomic Universities throughout the country. Besides teachers,
students, workers and scholars, all are needed who have funds to invest
in land and enterprises, those who know how to plan and those who know
how to build, those most especially who know how to teach, -- to work
with others. There is not much room for the individualist, but much need
for the personalist, in the communitarian society where the aim will be
the common good; the need to make the kind of social order "where it is
easier for man to be good," as Peter Maurin said.

There is time to talk about these things in prison, in meeting halls, in
times of unemployment and tension. We each have our vocation â€“ the thing
to do is to answer the call. We each have something to give.

LATE NOTES
----------

We last went to press June 12. So far five families have had vacations
at the beach house in Staten Island. There is usually a day or so in
between to clean up a bit and defrost the ice box. With lots of kids
there is bound to be some disorder and breakage, but this year one of
the unemployed men of the family repaired a bit of plumbing, something
we had been trying to get done for months. There is so much building on
the island it is impossible to get a plumber. Also we like to think of
the miracle of a house free from bugs all these summers. In spite of the
fact that these families come from the real slums and are crowded into a
few small rooms in town, none of them have brought with them any noxious
insects. But as for mosquitos, -- we haven't a single mosquito, says
Stanley. They are all married and with large families.

Fr. McSorley Died
-----------------

Our dear friend Fr. McSorley, with whose encouragement and advice Peter
Maurin and I launched the Catholic Worker back in 1933, died, and was
buried Saturday, July 6. I thought, during the requiem Mass, how gentle
and how saintly a man. His whole life reads like the life of a saint. It
was all entirely directed to the priesthood and I felt, as I never did
before at anyone's passing, that here had been a man of complete
innocence and yet one of whom one could go loaded down with guilt and
misery and know that he was filled with loving kindness and
understanding. "He is a priest forever," as the priest who preached his
funeral sermon said, "and so we can still count on his help."

Sasha Died
----------

In the mid section of The Long Loneliness when I wrote of a time of
"natural happiness," I tell of a Russian Jewish family who figured
largely in my life at that time. The father of that family died during
the month and it was a shock to hear that he had gone from us. There are
so many memories of discussions, literary and political, with a
background of guitar music and Russian folk songs. Sasha introduced to
us Dzarjevsky (who gave me his baptismal cross and for whom I am bound
to pray), Salama, and the Bulgakov family, and I remember how Freda and
I taught Varya how to read English from **Candide**. Sasha had a little
garden and he told us once that he wished we would some day plant some
dill on his grave when he died it was so delectable an herb in salads. I
lived with them in the city for a time, and when I had my home on Staten
Island, the Maruchess family bought a place next door and we were
constant companions for years. May he rest in peace!

Michael Died
------------

One can think peacefully of the death of a Fr. McSorley but not of a
Michael who was too young to die. Michael Willock was only eighteen and
the last time I saw him was when he and his father Ed had spent a
Thanksgiving vacation with us on the Staten Island farm.

Suffering is a mystery and often one cries out, Why, why? We ask the
prayers of our readers for Dorothy Willock and the children.

Hiroshima Day
-------------

As we go to press, Aug. 6, A. J. Muste has been leading a large group of
demonstrators in a sit-down before the Atomic Energy Commission on
Hudson and Houston Streets. A vigil is lined up before the block long
building, which will be continued for the next three days. Hour by hour,
one of the watchers goes to take his place beside A. J. Muste who has
led in the sit-down, blocking the door of the main entrance to the
building. We will write more of this in the next issue.

Danville Again
--------------

**Late News.** Rev. Chase of Danville whose wife led the Mothers for
Freedom picket line in Danville in which I took part, was arrested.
Police came at four-thirty in the morning and kicked in the door of this
home and dragged him out in pajamas to the local jail. Later in the day
eighty more pickets were arrested, including Mrs. Chase, his wife.

Retreat Movement
----------------

Fr. Marion Casey of Belle Plaine, Minnesota gave us our annual retreat
which began on a Sunday night and lasted until Saturday. I am writing a
book about this spiritual adventure, which the Catholic Worker Press
will publish later.
