% On Pilgrimage - December 1963
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1963, 2, 6.

*Summary: Notes the assassination of President Kennedy. Says she wants to write a
book about how the retreats of the 1940s strengthened her. Goes on to
stress the need for spiritual training. Acknowledges Peter Maurin's
influence on her. (DDLW \#810).*

The gigantic nature of the struggle in which we are each one of us
engaged, a struggle between the forces of good and evil was clearly
shown to us this last month by the assassination of our President. This
story of horror is still unfolding in the daily press. It is not for us
to reiterate what all are reading in their daily papers and listening to
on their radios. And all who read and listen are relating what occurred
to all that went before, the recent past with its murder of little
children in Birmingham, bombings and shootings in the South, the
assassinations of the president of Viet Nam and his brother-in-law.
Violence in the rest of the world more or less accepted as "a fact of
life" inevitable in the struggle for a better world, but resulting in
shocked grief and bitter tears by our own people when it happens to us.

I was in Chicago when I heard the news. I had just gotten off the bus
from South Bend, where I had been speaking to Notre Dame students,
seminarians, Brothers, and parishioners at the liturgical fair held in
St. Therese' parish. I had gone to Nina Polcyn's whose guest I always am
in Chicago, and she had left St. Benet's book shop on South Wabash to go
to Mass with me at the Paulist church and then to lunch. The news came
to us then over the radio and we could only sit and weep at the
senseless violence that had erupted again, this time striking down a
young and vital leader of a State, a husband, son and father.

Two days later, as we came from the liturgy in Fr. Chrysostom's Eastern
rite church on West Fullerton, we heard the news of the second blow
struck, another assassination, even more horrible than the first in that
it took place in a police station, where men are supposed to be mindful
of "law and order," the protection of the weak and innocent, and where
all men are presumed innocent, so it is said, until they are proven
guilty. To this we had come. To these low depths we had fallen.

Christmas
---------

Yet here we are at this happy season, the time of the birth of Jesus
Christ into the world as an infant in a manger, and "the government of
this world is on His shoulders," and we know that God can bring good out
of evil, that all things can work together for good to those who love
God, that the time of rejoicing comes almost simultaneously with the
time of sorrow, of repentance, that there is no "time" with God, that we
are living in eternity this moment, and the "all the way to heaven is
heaven, because He said, I am the Way."

In this column I do not wish to write about those things which everyone
can read in his daily papers, or diocesan papers, except to call to our
readers' attention some of the things which are going on, especially in
the Church today.

My job, my vocation is to write, not only to write for The Catholic
Worker, but also for other papers, and also to write another book. I
wish to write one more book before I die and that will be about a
spiritual adventure, our retreats which began in the early forties which
influenced my life and gave me the courage to persevere, and so filled
my heart with joy that "this joy no man can take from me." In my recent
book, published last month, LOAVES AND FISHES, I tell a bit of it in the
chapter on Father Roy, but the story begins even before that, and
continues long after, -- that story of a spiritual adventure. When I saw
Father Putz recently at Notre Dame and he told me he had just reviewed
my book for the **Davenport Messenger**, he asked me why I had not
written about Fr. Hugo. "It is because I wish to devote an entire book
to the movement of which he was a vital part," I told him. And that very
night I met two young graduate students, of Notre Dame, who had just
come from their home in Pittsburgh where they had made the retreat with
Fr. Hugo which his is giving them now in St. Germaine's parish, to the
families of the parish. Fr. Hugo is mentioned too in the leading article
in December's **Harpers**, "Muzzling the Reformers Inside American
Catholicism."

I could not do justice to Fr. Hugo in a chapter, indeed not even in a
book, but as a journalist, as an essayist, I can at least call attention
to his teachings, and what it has meant to a large segment of our fellow
Catholics not only throughout the country but throughout the world. In a
way the suppression of his thought in America has been an illustration
of that new Testament teaching, "unless the seed fall into the ground
and die, it remains alone, but when it dies it bears much fruit." There
have been years when it would seem that those who gave the retreat which
Fr. Hugo also gave were also dead but the tree is budding forth and will
bear more fruit. There will be ebb and flow, there will be winter and
spring, and periods of growing and the harvest. Where sin abounds, grace
did more abound, as St. Paul said, and what stirrings there are in the
Church today.

The entire world has acclaimed Pope John, and he increased the sum total
of love in the world and renewed the health of the Mystical Body of
which we are all members, or potential members.

There are the **cursillos** now, courses in Christianity, a tremendous
movement among the people, beginning with the Spanish speaking ones,
Mexicans and Puerto Ricans in our own country.

There is the Better World movement of Fr. Lombardi, S.J.

All of these are movements to deepen the spiritual life of men of good
will, men of desires. And of course these need to go hand in hand with
all the work in the world today.

As I write letters, answering the cartons of mail which await me when I
return from a month's trip, I feel as though I were talking to our
readers and they to me, and I think of all the things I would like to
say to them personally which are hard to get down on paper, but which
come so readily when one is face to face with others.

When Bea Brickey wrote to me from Colifornia and told me of some of the
work being done for the migrant workers, she sent me also a wonderful
booklet called Children Count (copies are available from Emma Gunterman,
Rte. One, Box 746, Gridley, Calif.), which tells of the volunteer
educational program for farm labor children for which 60 volunteers
contributed from two hours to six weeks of their time, conducting a
summer school, nursery school and library program during the peak of one
harvest season. How to get started on such a program, and the case
histories of some of the migrant families are given, and it is good to
get the actual figures as to amount of work available, pay earned, how
many of the children worked, and so on. It is a good study and I wished
that others could read it who tried to work in other parts of the
country, slum or city, along those lines.

Rev. J. H. Steele
-----------------

From Chicago Fr. Steele writes of his Inter-American Cooperative
Institute (1300 South Wabash Ave., Chicago 5, Ill.) and his literature
tells of a six month training course for work in the socio-economic
fields in Latin America. This work is all according to the teaching on
subsidiarity of Pope John in his encyclical Mater et Magistra. There are
so many opportunities to work, to get the training needed, that it seems
strange that more are not taking advantage of it. What we need are not
only men of desires with a strong sense of the need to help their
fellows, but also a strong reform in the field of education. Mostly our
education is materialistic, our newspapers and magazines increase our
desires for the things of this world -- young people are taught to "get
on in the world," be educated in order to get a good job, earn a good
living, and pay in turn for their children to get to good schools where
they will get the same kind of training.

Basic Need
----------

The basic need is for a change in the hearts and souls, and when we
write of destitution and voluntary poverty as one of the means to combat
it, it is to emphasize the primacy of the spiritual.

Thank God we also have such a movement as that of the Little Brothers
and Sisters of Charles de Foucauld who by their poverty and manual labor
are pointing the way. They too have long periods of spiritual formation
and training so that the richness of their interior life is in some way
a compensation for the barreness of their existence. There is a story
about their beginnings in this country, in a slum in Detroit in the
November number of **Jubilee** where there is also a story about Louis
Murphy and the House of Hospitality in Detroit.

Do write for booklets about the Little Brothers of Charles de Foucauld
from Jesus Caritas, 700 Irving St., N.E., Washington, D.C.

And speaking about destitution -- The Catholic Worker in Detroit needs a
new furnace for Martha House, 1212 Leverette St. We have been hoping to
send them some money towards one, but have not been able as yet.

The Lesson of Cuba
------------------

On Pilgrimage -- December 3

It makes me happy to have this excellent review of Les Dewart's book
Christianity and Revolution: the Lesson of Cuba, for this issue of the
paper. Dr. Dewart teaches at St. Michaels's College in Toronto. The
review is by James Douglass, who has a degree in theology from Notre
Dame, and who is at present studying in Rome, theology in relation to
war and peace. It was his wife Sally who travelled with me in Italy last
spring, on my week's trip to Assisi, Milan, Florence and Siena. The
latest news of the family is that Sally gave birth to a little girl who
was baptized by Bishop Wright in St. Peter's (there were a thousand
seminarians present at the time) and the infant was presented by Bishop
Wright to the Blessed Mother of Michael Angelo's Pieta, the very one I
suppose which will be loaned to the World's Fair next year. What a child
that should be -- another Therese or Catherine -- a valiant woman to
work for God. She is their third child, and she has two little brothers.

Loaves and Fishes
-----------------

I reprint the review of my own book which appeared in PEACE NEWS which
is published in England at 5 Caledonian Road, London, N. 1. I reprint it
because there is a recognition of the all important part Peter Maurin
played in the work of the CW and still plays. There is some praise of me
which I would like to cut but that would be stupid because I know that
as a journalist and as a housekeeper and as a "slow learner" I played a
most important part, thanks to God's providence in getting the work
started and keeping it going. Youth demands the heroic, as Paul Claudel
says, and youth is still responding to Peter Maurin's ideas. All ages,
in fact. I reprint the review because F. A. Lea recognized Peter for
what he was. It made me feel good about the book.

I'd like to say too, in relation to that sentence which is quoted about
whether I "really liked Peter." I was calling attention to the fact that
regardless of the great dissimilarity of our tastes, in music,
literature, and so on, it was not attractiveness of person, or
personality that won people to him, but simply what he was. A French
priest whose name escapes me and who died in a concentration camp during
the Second World War pointed out how we should be careful not to exert
personal influence to win people to ideas -- that their freedom is so
sacred a gift that they must not be constrained, or forced in any way.
It is the truth which should attract. Or rather Jesus, who is the way,
the truth and the life, who attracts. More often than not, we ourselves
get in the way.
