% On Pilgrimage - February 1964
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1964, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: Reflects on voluntary poverty against the backdrop of stories
of theft and being taken advantage of by guests. Asks if we are ready to
be robbed of our goods, relinquish what we have, and share with the
poor. "Do we really welcome poverty as liberating?" (DDLW \#812).*

"He shall bring them down that dwell on high.  
The high city shall lay low.  
He shall bring it down even to the ground.  
He shall put it down even to the dust.  
The foot shall trend it down,  
The feet of the poor, the steps of the needy."  
Isaiah 26

Non-violence, the feet of the poor, not the clenched fist. Anderson's
**Marching Men**. That was the name of a book of Sherwood Anderson's
that I reviewed many years ago when it first came out. The Freedom
Walks, the Quebec to Guantanamo walk this past month have made me think
of these things. They walk in poverty, this group; stripped of all
comfort; imprisoned and tortured, fearful and yet determined, they have
shared the suffering of their brothers in the South.

Tom Cornell has written of them in this issue of the paper.

Looking back on what has happened this month since we went to press
January 8. Martin Corbin visited the farm for a few days ... A
still-born child was born to a girl on the farm ... The local hospital
which is so hospitable to our family of the poor sent us a woman
recovering from pneumonia...One of the women I met at Spode House in
England has come to join us, to help us...We had a tremendous bill from
a plumber in mid-January when our oil burning furnace stopped, pipes
froze, and left thirteen men in cold rooms for two night and a day...It
was five above zero those days. We have other troubles, legal and
financial which I will write about later...Al Learnard came to join the
farm community...Jean Walsh is still away but is expected to return in a
few weeks. Charles Butterworth is taking a sabbatical, as it were, for
prayer and study.

I speak at Trinity forum in downtown Manhattan February 5, probably to
Wall street workers on voluntary poverty! On February 8 at a public
school in Greenwich Village on the Woman's House of Detention which for
Deane and I, was home briefly once a year for five years. Other speakers
that day will be Jane Jacobs, City planner, and Fr. Egan, of Graymoor
who has done so much for released prisoners who have been addicts. This
meeting is sponsored by the Village Independent Democrats.

Thursday and Friday, Feb. 13 and 14, I speak at Winthrop Hall, Harvard,
or rather have discussions with the students there. On Saturday, I will
speak at New England Mutual Hall, Copley Square in Boston, at a Catholic
Book Fair, I believe, together with other authors; and in the evening at
Ed Sweny's Holy Spirit Book Shop. Then on Monday, Feb. 17 in Oneonta,
New York, at the University. On the 25th I speak at a Fellowship meeting
at the Presbyterian church in Princeton, New Jersey.

The month will fly by, and although there are blizzards in March, there
is also the first day of spring.

Dear Soul
---------

Arthur J. Lacey, one of the most useful members of the Catholic Worker
group, whom some of us call "dear soul" to tease him for the tender
solicitude he shows those who come to him -- "and what is your problem,
dear soul," -- spent a week's vacation in Detroit last month as the
guest of Dan Shay, former young Christian Worker who is aspiring to
start a hostel in downtown Detroit to be called St. Thomas More house.
He visited St. Francis House and was much impressed by how well it was
kept and run. He visited the Murphys in St. Martha House and the Little
Brothers of Charles de Foucauld, attended a Cursilla Mass on Saturday at
Fr. Kern's parish, visited the families at the farm at South Lyons, the
Meltons, the Johnsons, the Martuses, and the Catholic Worker farm where
the Murphys stay in summer and which some of the men from St. Francis
House keep going in winter.

Speaking of Poverty
-------------------

On a number of occasions when I have been speaking at schools where the
nuns have been troubled at the idea of living in luxury and deeply
desired poverty, I talked of the readiness we ought to have to be
despoiled of our goods, to be robbed, taken advantage of by those we
trusted. As Fr. Roy used to say, "God takes us at our word." We had an
experience last month which shocked us all profoundly. Indeed so much
so, that Deane has been quite unable to write her usual column, she has
been so saddened by the tragedy of the loss of a friend.

A man who has been staying with us for six months, who was gifted,
amiable, generous, helpful, doing all kinds of menial chores, shopping,
running errands, taking the fellow workers at Peter Maurin Farm to the
hospital -- Larry to the asthma clinic, Barbara to maternity, Shorty to
that for Parkinson's disease; bringing Albert last week to St. Rose's
Hospital in New York; bringing Peggy to the city with one of her cats
(the latter stalked and pursued around the bare wisteria, forsythia and
privet hedge and then packaged in a carton, tied up and carried),
listening to the woes of young and old (he had worked for five years in
a home for deliquent boys) -- this man suddenly packed his things, all
obtained from the CW clothes room, got into the one good car and took
off. With him also went two hundred and eighty-five dollars of our money
and four blank checks, already signed, which he could probably cash
along the road with some school or rectory where the CW is known.

No one knew he was gone until Sunday morning when John, Jim, Hans, Andy,
Larry, George, Slim, John B., Joe D., Joe C., Deane, Clare, Barbara,
Alice, Paul, Shorty, etc. etc. were ready for eight o'clock Mass. We
make two trips back and forth, and not all listed above go, but I name
them to indicate the numbers involved on a Sunday morning who depend on
the car to get to confession and Mass, since confessions are heard
before Mass in our little country chapel. Those who could walk, who were
not too old or too crippled, walked that morning to a later Mass.

Charles Butterworth was on retreat at the Trappists in Winchester. I was
in New York at the time, attending a Third Hour meeting at Claire
Bishop's.

The consternation over our misfortune was immense. No one ever did such
a thing before! But only a few nights before the car was missing one of
the kids in the neighborhood was caught siphoning all the gasoline out
of the tank and when detected fled, leaving his five-gallon can and
tube. And what about a few weeks ago when fifteen pounds of pork roast,
all the Sunday meat for our large community and Sunday company,
disappeared out of a clear sky, and we were forced to eat scrambled
powdered eggs instead. And what about the man from Sing Sing sent to us
by a Prisoner's Society who left with the best clothes in the dormitory
and everyone's pockets carefully picked. And that young fellow, so
handsome and so disturbed, sent to us by a priest, who took a visitor's
purse. Martie Corbin, one of our editors, lost his overcoat last week.
One should not leave it on a bench in the hall, because that is where
our charitable visitors leave clothes for the poor. He should have put
it in his room.

I try to think of other cases in the past. There was the wayfarer for
instance who stole the Thanksgiving turkey out of the refrigerator at
Mott street years ago and was there a hullabaloo over that! I think it
was then that I thought of St. John Cantius who ran after the thief who
was making off with his wallet to tell him that there was still a gold
piece tied up in his cloak, whereupon the thief fell on his knees in
repentance and gave back what he had taken.

I did not have too much faith in this story, however. I remembered how
Peter Maurin had been robbed in Morningside Park one summer evening and
returned home with a black eye and when we indignantly asked him how
anyone had dared to strike him, he replied that he only had been trying
to tell the thief that he had money in the other pocket! Just the same I
told the story of St. John Cantius to the household and told Slim, who
had been sort of night clerk at that time of our hospice on Mott street,
that he should have run after the thief with the celery and cranberries
too! My remedy was treated scornfully by the house, whose mouth had been
watering for that turkey.

Just the same the story had a happy ending. Ten years later, when we had
moved to Chrystie street, that same thief came in one day and gave
whoever sat at the desk a ten dollar bill, saying it was restitution for
a turkey he had walked off with years before.

I remember too the story James Brazel told about how he first came to
the Catholic Worker. He had run into a man on the Bowery, an old crony,
who noticed that Jim had no coat.

"Go over to the Catholic Worker," he told him. "I got three coats there
this winter," meaning no doubt that he had sold them when the weather
warmed up and got another when the thermometer went down. So Jimmy came
to get a coat.

"I got five coats here that winter," he boasted. It may or may not have
been true. All I know was that Jimmy stayed with us for seven years and
served the poor faithfully. He was an all around handy man and could
take care of crises in the plumbing and electric works around the place,
besides carpentry and other work. He is working now as a stationary
engineer on a job he obtained during the war and at which he was so
dependable that he has been kept on ever since.

Undoubtedly there are many more such little incidents I could tell, and
all our houses around the country could tell similar stories. Sometimes
the guilty ones were strangers, and sometimes they were very much part
of the family folks we had grown to love and to consider as "beloveds,"
as St. Paul called them.

And how are we able to react after the instinctive motions of righteous
wrath are under control? Our only guide is first of all our common
sense, which tells us to put a lock on our gas tank for instance, and to
keep the check book locked away safely, and not to put occasions of sin
in the path of the weak. And then we are to go by the light of faith and
the Old as well as the New Testament is our guide.

In the book of Osee, the forgiveness of God is shown for a faithless
people, in the action of the prophet who forgave his erring wife over
and over, even supported her and her lovers! In the New Testament in the
words of Jesus who told us to forgive seventy times seven when our
brother offended against us. And if anyone took our coat we were to give
our cloak also, and if any one forced us to walk a mile with him we were
to walk two miles, and if he struck us we were to run the other cheek.
There is also the commentary on the story of the prodigal son Peguy
tells again in "God Speaks."

Over and over again we are given the chance to re-examine our position
-- are we ready to relinquish what we have, not just to the poor to
share with them what we have but to the poor who rise in revolution to
take what they have been deprived of for so long? Are we ready too, to
have the drunken poor, the insane poor and what more horrible
deprivation than this, to have one's interior senses, the memory, the
understanding and the will, impoverished to the extent that one is no
longer rational -- are we ready to be robbed in this way? Do we really
welcome poverty as liberating?

"Let nothing disturb thee, nothing affright thee," St. Teresa said, "all
things are passing. God alone never changes."

Every day we have evidence of His warm loving care for us. Since He has
given us His Son -- will He not give us also every good thing? All else
that we need? We are rich indeed.

And even if we did not struggle to atain a supernatural point of view
about these crises, peace and calm, and yes, even the sureness that all
will work out to the good, comes with the fact that we are too busy to
think, to remember. Work is there to be done, city and country, crowds
press in upon us from every side.

Our only grief is the suffering we must feel for the absconding one,
fleeing, hiding, friendless, tormented. We ask your prayers for him.
