% Review of In Solitary Witness (cont.)
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1965, 5, 7.

*Summary: Continues to give details of Franz Jagerstatter's resistance
to the Nazi regime. Admires his solitary, almost unnoticed, witness. See
him as a beacon for conscientious objectors in the Vietnam era. (DDLW
\#829).*

**IN SOLITARY WITNESS. The life and death of Franz Jagerstatter, by
Gordon Zahn. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 383 Madison Avenue, New
York, N.Y., \$5.95. Reviewed by DOROTHY DAY.**

*(Continued from Last Issue)*

"There is no hiding the fact that it is much harder to be a Christian
today than when it was in the first centuries, and there is every reason
to predict that it will be even more difficult in the near future. When
it becomes the 'sacred duty' of a man to commit sin, the Christian no
longer knows how he should live. There remains nothing else for him to
do but bear individual witness -- alone. And where such witness is,
there is the Kingdom of God."

It is these words of Reinhold Schneider which Gordon Zahn uses when he
humbly dedicates this book to the memory of Franz Jagerstatter "and to
all the others who, like him, stood alone and said 'No'--many of whose
stories have been completely lost to history, at least as it is kept and
written by men."

The facts of Franz' life are these: He was born May 20, 1907 in St.
Radegund, a little village in upper Austria. His daily life was like
that of most Austrian peasants. In nineteen thirty-six he married a girl
from a nearby village and she is credited with changing him from "a
beloved, lusty youth," "an accomplished and enthusiastic fighter" into a
strongly religious man. But his wife today denies this and said his
religious awakening came about gradually around the time of his
marriage. They went to Rome on their honeymoon.

She had met him at a dance at Ach where she herself had been working as
a waitress. Later in addition to running the family farm, Franz became
sexton of the parish church. When Hitler's troops moved into Austria in
1938, Jagerstatter was the only man in the village to vote against the
**Anschluss**. Before this he has served his military training and had
not been interested in politics nor was he involved in any political
organization. After Hitler's occupation he refused to contribute in any
way to Hitler's collections or to receive any benefits. It was
necessary, he said, to disassociate oneself from the Nazi Folk Community
and make no contributions to it. "Anyone who wishes to practice
Christian Charity in his deeds can manage to provide the poor with
something for their sustenance without Winter Relief Collection or the
Peoples' Welfare fund." He renounced all claims to the official Family
Assistance Program under which he would have been entitled to cash
allotments for his children and after a disaster to the crops, he
refused the emergency cash subsidies offered the farmers by the
government. He was alone in his refusal.

The family, Gordon Zahn pointed out, was living at a level described as
being near the point of poverty, nevertheless he distributed foodstuffs
to the poor. These facts might indicate a level of production geared to
the minimal needs of subsistence and an avoidance of higher levels of
farm production.

Franz remained openly anti-Nazi and refused to fight in Hitler's war. He
was finally called in February, 1943 and was imprisoned first at Linz,
then at Berlin. After a military trial he was beheaded August 9, 1943.
He was cremated, his ashes cared for by friends and after the war buried
in the churchyard of St. Radegund, and his name included in the list of
those who died in the war.

Gordon Zahn makes an interesting comparison between St. Thomas More and
his witness and that of the humble peasant, the "great man" and the
"little man," and the comparison, he says may perhaps enhance rather
than diminish the significance of the latter's sacrifice. "For the very
fact that none would notice or be likely to be affected by what he did
serves to reduce the issue to the individual and his conscience in
silent and inner confrontation with God. Certainly this is what it meant
to Franz Jagerstatter himself. That same confrontation existed for St.
Thomas More, but to the extent to which he knew that others would take
account of what he did, he was not alone. As far as the St. Radegund
peasant knew, the choice he made would pass unnoticed by the world and
would completely fade from human memory with the passing of the handful
of people who had known him personally."

We owe a great debt of gratitude to Gordon Zahn for undertaking so
exhaustive a study of this modern martyr.

How did Franz Jagerstatter get that way? The few simple facts that we
know are that his religious awakening came about because of a retreat.
He had lived of course in the simple religious atmosphere of the
Austrian village, where all were Catholic, and close to the church where
he was sexton, which meant daily contact with the Holy Eucharist. He was
poor, he led a life of hard work. He read Scriptures and the Lives of
the Saints, (which included St. Thomas More and the Cure of Ars, who was
what one would call today a "draft dodger".)

There was no chance at all of his affecting the policies of the State,
or influencing the lives of others as far as he knew. Another little
saint of today, who died ten years before Franz was born, was of a
bourgeois background but equally little and unimportant, St. Therese of
Lisieux, coming from a small town in France, born of a father who was a
watchmaker and a mother who was a lacemaker.

No one encouraged Franz in his act of disobedience to the orders of the
state. Everyone argued against what he was doing, even the most
sympathetic of priests, who could only see his resistance as futile, and
even bad for the institutionalized Church.

But to two priests today, Gordon Zahn writes, must go the credit of
keeping Franz's memory alive today. The dean of St. Margarethe's Church
in Bruhl, Germany, Heinrich Kreuzberg, who had been prison chaplain in
Berlin, and Fr. Josef Karobath, pastor of the parish church of St.
Radegund. And the greatest consolation Franz received while he awaited
his execution in prison was the news that Fr. Franz Reinisch, a priest
of the Pallotine order of Austria, also had been executed for refusal to
take the military oath requiring that he swear unconditional obedience
to the person of Hitler.

"Even while I was telling him of this," Fr. Kreuzberg writes, "his eyes
lit up and after a deep sigh as if a heavy burden had fallen from his
soul he joyously declared, 'But this is what I have always told myself,
that I cannot be following a false path. If a priest made such a
decision and went to his death, then I may do so too.'"

To me it is very consoling that Franz Jagerstatter had in addition to
Christ in the bread and wine of the Eucharist, also knowledge of Christ
in one of His priests today who had taken the same stand and so was in a
way accompanying him those last hard days.

I still do not feel that I am through with this review of Gordon Zahn's
book until I have quoted at length from Franz's few writings, in the
future issue of the **Catholic Worker.**

Let us pray that Gordon's book, which contains these writings in its
appendix, will reach all the young men who are questioning their stand
today in the face of conscription for the war which is going on in
Vietnam right now. These essays, **On Irresponsibility, Is there
anything the individual can still do? Is there still a God? War or
Revolution? On Dangerous Weapons.** And last but not least, **The Prison
Statement,** surely must be reprinted in the pages of **The Catholic
Worker** as far as we will be permitted by the publisher.

If the most famous words of the little Saint Therese were "I will spend
my heaven doing good upon earth," let us hope that these desires also
animate Franz Jagerstatter today in this time of our utmost need, utmost
danger. Standing before the face of God as he does, may he intercede for
us all, and pray that the hearts of young men will be filled with the
courage he showed, and the conviction which enabled him to take his
solitary stand, and give his "solitary witness."
