% Fall Appeal - October/November 1966
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October-November 1966, 2.

*Summary: She asks for help--"It is hard to be a beggar." Admires the
voluntary poverty of St. Francis, Gandhi, and Peter Maurin. In contrast,
the "destitute and dissolute" are often despised as "bums" in the city
and we fail to see "the sacred element in every human being." (Simone
Weil) (DDLW \#844).*

St. Joseph's House  
175 Chrystie Street  
New York, N.Y. 10002

Dear Beloved Ones,

Here it is October again and time to write our semiannual appeal to you
our readers to help us keep going another few months. It is a beautiful
day, the sun coming up right over the Williamsburg Bridge, the air
clear, and here I am groaning within myself at having to ask for money.
It is hard to be a beggar. Even St. Francis, the mendicant, whose feat
comes at the beginning of this month, found it easier to help himself to
his rich father's goods to restore His Church, but not by another
building operation. He learned the hard way as we all do. He had to give
back what he had taken, and when his first disciple came to him, he
showed how he felt about money by making Bernard, his first follower,
give away all he had before he let him join him in his new way of life,
the life of poverty.

In the little foreword to the Mass of the feast of St. Francis, he is
referred to as a serviceman, and he certainly took part in the
inter-city wars of his day, and for a year was imprisoned in Perugia.
"This affliction he suffered a whole year with great alacrity, and
comforted his companions." He always loved to sing and give feasts and
walk the streets of Assisi in his all night long revelry, but the Lord
kept calling him till he gave away his fine clothes and his uniform too.
He began his spiritual warfare with loathing and fear but overcame
himself by kissing the leper, and it was that hard act which
transfigured him and turned him to the works of mercy. He visited the
hospitals and served the lepers and he finally, at twenty-five,
separated himself from his father, he put on the dress of a poor
shepherd and the multitudes followed him as they did a Gandhi in our own
day. Both were poor, both were ascetics. Both loved peace and worked for
it and faced, unarmed, the sultans and rulers of their day.

Thanks to Peter Maurin, French peasant and founder of the Catholic
Worker movement in 1933, we too, working in houses of hospitality such
as that at Chrystie Street, feel that we have been called to a life of
voluntary poverty. We know that there can be a natural attraction to
poverty and the irresponsibility which goes with it. Artists, writers,
musicians and scientists have embraced poverty rather than the rewards
of the world to follow their own vocation. But surely it is a strange
vocation to love the destitute and dissolute, those men sleeping in
doorways, foul with the filth of the gutter, dying of drunkenness and
malnutrition and fever and cold. We have known many such deaths and have
witnessed the depths of misery around us. Only last month a group of
school children, in their early teens, poured kerosene on three such
men, lying in doorways sleeping in the still warm nights, and set fire
to them! This act of horror gives witness to the all too prevalent
attitude to these men--"They are only bums" one child said, and the
mother of another, "Someone ought to do something about these bums"--who
are found in every corner of the city, in vacant buildings, in the
shadow of warehouses in neighborhoods deserted at night.

Looking up something in a book of notes taken in 1952 I find these
sentences from an article called "Beyond Personalism" by Simone Weil in
**Cross Currents**, Spring '52 issue, "From earliest childhood to the
grave there is something in the depths of every human heart, which in
spite of all the experience of crimes that have been committed, endured,
observed --invincibly expects people to do good and not evil. More than
any other thing, this is the sacred element in every human being." This
applies to these children, to these derelicts, and to us and to you, to
rich and to poor. So we ask your help and your prayers.

Gratefully in Christ,

Dorothy Day
