% On Pilgrimage - September 1967
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1967, 2, 7.

*Summary: After a quiet rising and a time of spiritual reading her
writing time is filled with city street noises. Writes of migrant
laborer conditions in New York and Vermont where much of the misery is
hidden from view. Keywords: Negro, Black, Afro-American (DDLW \#855).*

If I don't wake up early enough to have a spiritual reading before
rising to face the day, I feel cheated of a sustenance I badly need,
considering the crowded days of conferences and visitors all summer in
both country and city. This morning my reading was again from Father
Ernesto Balducci's book, " John--The Transitional Pope" published by
McGraw-Hill in 1964 and a real treasure. I have quoted from him before,
and I have special esteem for Father Balducci because he is a
conscientious objector to war, and has suffered for it as the late
Father Lorenzo Milani did. The quotation from Pope John he cites on page
127 is this:
 
"The love of truth. On the day of my episcopal consecration the Church
gave me a particular mandate concerning it: 'Let him [the bishop] choose
humility and truth and never forsake them for any flattery or threats.
Let him not consider light to be darkness, or darkness light; let him
not call evil good, or good evil. Let him learn from wise men and fools,
so that he may profit from all.'"
 
These powerful words are used in the consecration of bishops, and I
think of them now as I rejoice in the fact that six or seven Catholic
bishops have come out against the Vietnam war. That the latest one to do
so is Archbishop James Davis, of Santa Fe, New Mexico, reminds me of
that great book of Willa Cather, "Death Comes for the Archbishop" which
is about the first Bishop of Santa Fe and a most beautiful story of the
period and surroundings.
 
September 8
---

Birthday of the Blessed Virgin. Twenty-two years ago today a dozen or
so of us made a pilgrimage of penance to the shrine of Mother Cabrini,
walking from 115 Mott St., where the Catholic Worker House of
Hospitality was then located. We walked from Canal Street along Broadway
to 208th Street. The Second World War had just ended. The bomb had been
dropped in August on Hiroshima and Nagasaki (any means to an end!) and
we have been living in fear and in "brush fire wars" ever since. The war
goes on in Vietnam. If it ceased tomorrow, it would be going on in some
other quarter of the globe and we, as the richest nation, making so much
money out of our armaments, would be very much involved still. The
causes of war are still with us: fear, hatred, greed, and "each man
seeking his own." 
 
One of the early Fathers of the Church once wrote that if we could
stand on a mountain top and see all the misery and tragedy of the world,
we could not survive the horror of it. Now we have television and can
indeed see what is happening, can witness the murder of Lee Harvey
Oswald, the torture of prisoners in Vietnam, the death of our own
soldiers--horror upon horror, until the mind and soul are blunted, sated
with blood, blood which cries out to heaven. Indeed Jesus is in agony
until the end of the world.
 
Juliana of Norwich said, and it is for our comfort, "the worst has
already happened and been remedied." The worst being the Fall, and the
remedy is still with us, "the same yesterday and today and forever."
Even today, there are samplings of heaven, in love expressed, in peace
maintained. "All the way to heaven is heaven, because He said, 'I am the
Way.'" (All the way to hell can be hell too.)
 
Work is the great healer, the great remedy for many ills. Right now as
I write, in the midst of the Friday hubbub of trucks with horns blaring,
gears shifting at each light, the grinding up of the refuse of the city
in sanitation trucks, the shriek of sirens, there is a labor of love
going on. Two young men and two young women are engaged in thoroughly
cleaning and "de-bugging" one of the apartments of this house of
hospitality on Kenmare Street, where we will continue to live for two or
three months more, until the house on First Street is renovated. There
are three apartments on the second floor, one on the third. one on the
fourth, and one on the fifth, --two apartments for men and four for
women. A constant check is needed to keep them livable, and young men do
not like to be checked, nor are they orderly. There are 25 apartments
altogether in the house. The tenants are mostly Chinese or Italians and
some of the apartments are visions of comfort, because these are the
kind of tenants who have lived here, in what I call our Italian village,
for thirty years or more. The house is well built but slanting, a bit
sunk or settled since the subways were built underneath. The ceilings
are high and it looks out on two streets, so we have plenty of light and
air--and plenty of fumes too.
 
Huge trucks go by loaded with steel drums of all colors, with steel
castings of mysterious and fantastic shapes, and huge round-bodied
trucks shaped like gasoline or milk trucks, which carry sugar, syrup,
molasses and wine. I thought as I watched them this morning that if
there were a depression--if peace should break out-- these trucks would
cease and there would be quiet on Kenmare Street. Once in my life time,
as I traveled up and down the East Coast in the Thirties, I saw dead
factories; wheels had stopped turning, no smoke, no fumes came from
stacks and chimneys, the air was clear and quiet, and birds sang and
weeds, including my favorite sweet clover, grew all around the
factories.\

But I must quit dreaming and go on with this writing. The trouble is, so
much is happening day after day that it is hard to recall what happened
during these past weeks that I must report on.
 
Migrant Workers
---

Last month, my friends, the Don Browns of Corning, New York, gave me
hospitality on one of my "rural rides," to use Cobbett's title. Corning
is in Steuben County, west of Binghamton and south of the migrant
county. Negroes work on the potatoes, Puerto Ricans in the muck lands
where they were then harvesting lettuce, and later the whites will
harvest grapes. Don, who is a chemist in the Corning Glass works, has
long been concerned with the plight of the migrant. A hundred and
twenty-five bills aimed at improving their condition have been
introduced in Congress, but they have never got past committee. Whether
or not the National Labor Relations Act will be broadened to include the
farm worker is now being debated in Washington. It seems to me that this
debate has been going on for a long time. The right of the farm worker
to organize is under discussion, and some church groups are in favor of
it, but with no right for the workers to strike for better wages and
conditions.
 
They are not using the word **migrant** on the West Coast. Many have
settled on the land, and though they travel to harvest the crops, it is
within the limits of the Long Valley that they work. Some of the Negroes
working in Steuben County have traveled all the way from Florida, and
many go as far as Maine. But some of them settle in New York State, and
Don Brown, told me something about the unspeakable hardship they suffer
in the cold of winter. There is work all winter in the packing sheds,
where they sort the potatoes but often it is only a few days work a
week.
 
I saw two of the great packing sheds, Schuler's and McGunnicle's, great
modern plants. But down an old railroad track nearby there were ten
shacks where single men lived. We visited two camps near Avoka in which
the houses were made of cement block with screened windows. In addition
to a long dormitory with double- decker beds (bare mattresses and
blankets) there was a kitchen where the workers could prepare their
food.
 
It was a hot day, and in spite of the screened windows the flies came
in through the door where the screen had broken through and hung about
the bare light bulbs in the center of the dormitory. This was one of the
best of the camps and was run by a Negro farm couple. Since he and his
wife were both out in the fields, they obviously could not keep the
place clean, and the entire place looked incredibly dreary to me. But
then our own houses of hospitality present this same aspect, over and
over again. The volunteer workers who come to us have to be ready for
the most thankless labor, which they know, while they are doing it, will
have to be done over and over again, week after week, day after day. It
is hard to do a good job when you know that when you leave things will
relapse into the same dirty clutter and confusion. One can only endure
it by living with it permanently and continuing to cleanse the Augean
stables. A grim thought, but this is both voluntary poverty and respect
for manual labor. The first thing St. Francis after his conversion did
was to repair a church, thinking the voice of God which he heard say to
him "Francis, repair my Church" meant literally just that.
 
There are 120 camps within forty miles of Corning. Some are
barracks-like houses and others are just truck bodies, very close
together, so if one shack catches fire, everything is in danger. We
asked one Negro who lived next to a shack where two men had been burned
to death how his house had been spared and he said, "The Lord Jesus just
put his arms around my house and saved it for me." Was this mischievous
humor, or did he mean it? It is hard to think of Christianity as being
alive when you see our fellow humans living under such conditions.
 
It is hard to call our brothers blacks, somehow (and should it be
capitalized?) but today that is what they wish to be called. First it
was Negro, then colored, and now blacks, and certainly the majority are
not black any more than we are all "pink" as Bernard Shaw called us. But
maybe the men I saw are not as sophisticated as the city Negro. Perhaps
I should say Afro-Americans. Anyway, they have their own church, and
their own minister who preaches good long sermons, so the migrant
ministry spent four hundred dollars on playground equipment so that the
children could go out to play during the services, which take place
Wednesday and Sundays. The church is in the center of the county and
folk come from as far as thirty-five miles. It is so far away that they
can shout praise and jubilation to the Lord as loud and long as they
want, just as I have heard them do in Florida and even in Rome, where
Langston Hughes' **Black Nativity** was put on, to the joy and delight
of the Roman audience.
 
I saw the broken-down houses where not one but a number of families
lived. In one such house there were twenty-four people living-men, women
and children. 1 saw a corn crib which a young couple had lined with
broken-up cartons to insulate it and where they had burned sticks of
wood in an open pail to warm themselves while a child was born to them
in the dead of winter. I saw the debris of another camp where one man
raving with the fever of pneumonia had staggered out and fallen into an
old pit which had once been covered by an outhouse long since used for
kindling wood. He was unable to get out and was found frozen to death
the next day.
 
Ignorance
---

Father Paul Hanley Furfey once said to us in a conference that it is
obvious from the 25th chapter of St. Matthew that God does not forgive
ignorance. "When did we see you naked and not cover you, a stranger and
never made you welcome? And the Lord will answer, 'I tell you solemnly,
in so far as you neglected to do this to one of the least of these, you
neglected to do it to me.'"
 
I remember how long we lived on Maryfarm at Newburgh, in the midst of
apple orchards, and yet never knew who picked the crops, or realized how
many of the workers were hidden away on the back roads in shacks never
seen by those who drive by on the highways. It was only when we picked
up an old sick Negro on the highway that we began to see the immediacy
of the problem. It is all around us, just as every city is filled with
ghettoes and slums.
 
If we keep harping on these things, it is in order to arouse the
conscience. Because here in this Hudson River valley, when these black
brothers and sisters of ours wish to settle, they are not made welcome.
They may find jobs, the hard jobs, but how to find housing? That is the
problem.
 
So this year, beginning next week in fact, a day-care center is being
opened at the Catholic Worker Farm at Tivoli, to care for the pre-school
children of the migrant families who have come north to harvest the
apples. There will be children ranging from eight months old to six
years. The center will be under the auspices of New York State, and
workers, equipment and transportation are being provided by the State.
Mrs. Ann George of Albany represents the New York State Migrant Child
Care Committee, and is ably assisted by Mrs. Pearl Johnson, and Mr. Gus
Rhodes and Mr. John Murray of the Dutchess County Office of Economic
Opportunity.
 
I will be away while this activity takes place, so perhaps Deane will
give an account of it in her October column. We are merely providing the
space, the former casino and grounds, which are ample for the children,
but planning the program has involved many telephone calls and
consultations and our own education in the press. A migrant grandmother
and an eighteen-year-old girl farm worker as well as our neighbor Mrs.
Lorraine Freeman, and others will be working with the program, and there
is a daily visiting of camps and mothers and children to prepare for it.
Yesterday two men from Syracuse showed up from the State Day Care
Training Center to bring cots, cribs, playpens, tables and chairs and a
beautiful assortment of well built children's toys.
 
We've been having adults use the facilities of this farm in discussion
all summer and many young swimmers in the pool, but these will be the
youngest children we have yet accommodated, and at the sweetest age.

 Pilgrimaging Again
 ---
And as for me, I am setting out for Rome again.
 
From the eleventh to the eighteenth of October there will be an
International Congress of the Laity, a gathering of twenty-five hundred
Catholic lay people from all over the world, and, as I understand it,
the talks and discussions will be in every language and simultaneously
translated, just as at the United Nations, so that one will be able to
don earphones and understand representatives from Africa, Asia and
Europe. Our dear friend Marguerite Tjader Harris is taking care of my
expenses and I shall try to repay her by giving a good account of the
trip and the conferences for our ninety thousand readers.
 
Do we have so many? Who knows. We send out the papers, and they go to
libraries and schools as well as to individuals. On the other hand, I
once caught Mrs. Rubino, an old friend on East Fifteenth Street, lining
her garbage can with a copy of the CW. But of course we get letters
beginning, "I found your paper in a dentist's office"; or "I found your
paper in a coal mine six miles out under the Atlantic ocean," or "I
found your paper under a mattress in a cheap hotel in Tampico." These
last two testimonials as to how far the **Catholic Worker** travels are
literally true, though we received them years ago.
 
More recently, on board ship in 1965 on my way home from the fast in
Rome at which I participated, during the last session of the Second
Vatican Council, I received at my table, tourist class, a bottle of
wine, sent to me with the compliments of the purser of that ship of the
American Export line. When he came to see me later, he said that he had
received the **Catholic Worker** from one of the seamen who maintained a
little circulating library on board ship and passed the paper around.
 
What need do we have for a circulation manager? Smokey Joe can just sit
beside his desk and take the subscriptions which come in, and Gordon
McCarthy will attend to the stencils.

