% Tribute to the Nelsons
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1968, 2.

*Summary: Praises the dedicated work of Wally and Juanita Nelson for
peace, conscientious objection, and tax resistance. Notes their
willingness to be jailed and to fast for their convictions. Calls the
undeclared Vietnam war "this hideous struggle." (DDLW \#861).*

Every summer for the past three years a Peacemakers training program has
been held at our Tivoli farm for the last two or three weeks of August.
The old mansion and the Peter Maurin house are filled with guests, and
campers come and set up their tents on the lawn facing the river. The
organizer of the Peacemakers' school is Wally Nelson, who has been in
the workhouse in Cincinnati for the past two weeks, fasting. He and
several others were arrested during a vigil for DeCourcy Squire, an 18
yr. old Antioch student who had been hospitalized after fasting since
her arrest Dec. 7 and subsequent sentence of 9 mo. for participating in
a peace demonstration. (DeCourcy has since been released.)

A psychiatric examination was ordered for Wally when he refused to
co-operate with his arrest and trial. Found by court psychiatrists to be
"sane," he was sentenced for "loitering" to ten days in the workhouse,
\$25 and costs. Again refusing to co-operate with legalized injustice,
he was dragged from the police van by his legs, an action that caused
his wife Juanita to follow him, cradling his head in her hands. When
they arrived at Wally's cell, Nita bent over to kiss him, was arrested
for "disorderly conduct" and fined \$25 and costs. This she refused to
pay, and was ordered to the workhouse.

Detailed stories of these arrests are given in the February 10th issue
of the **Peacemaker**, (10208 Sylvan Avenue, (Gano) Cincinnati, Ohio
45241). I hope that many of our readers will subscribe to the
**Peacemaker**, since news of the conscientious objectors who are in
prison and much other war-resistance news can be obtained there.
Peacemakers have led in direct action for many years.

Wally and Juanita have both refused to pay income tax for many years,
and it is of them particularly I wish to write, with the most heartfelt
sympathy for their suffering and the greatest admiration for their
dedication. It is their vocation to realize and to lead others to
realize the horror of the times through which we are passing. Wally has
explained that his fasting during the jail sentences he has undergone
was the result not of wilful refusal but of a total inability to swallow
food while imprisoned. Simone Weil, the French woman whose brilliant
writings on man and the state, work and war, were widely published after
her death, suffered during the second world war in the same way. She was
literally unable to swallow enough food to keep her alive, in the face
of world starvation.

In the stories of the saints, one reads of such sensitivity, such
penances undergone, such fastings endured and they are little understood
by the secular world. I am convinced that this vocation, this calling,
to give oneself to one's brother, in loving communion, in loving
understanding of the heinous crimes that are being committed today was
at the root of Roger La Porte's immolation in front of the United
Nations two years ago. It is as though such men said, "We will suffer
with you, since we have no way of stopping the bombing, the burning, the
napalm, the defoliation, the destruction of homes and an entire
countryside. There is no act of ours extreme enough, no protest strong
enough, to deal with this horror."

Wally Nelson was in prison for thirty-three months during World War Two
and fasted for a hundred and eight days (with forced feeding by tube) as
a protest against racial segregation of prisoners. He had had time to
think out his position while in Civilian Public Service camp, as forced
labor camps which were set up for conscientious objectors were called.
These very camps were a concession to pacifists, who had been imprisoned
and brutally treated during World War One. But Wally decided to walk out
and did so and was arrested and jailed. His example and that of other
absolutists led to further concessions. In this present undeclared war
in Vietnam, to which ten thousand more men were shipped off yesterday,
the conscientious objector position is recognized, and paid employment
is offered in home hospitals as "alternative service." To accept this is
still to submit to the draft,--hence the continued protests against war,
and the drafting of youth to wage this hideous struggle.
