% The Eleventh Virgin
% Dorothy Day

Part Two, Chapter 2
---

One day June was walking leisurely along Fourteenth Street when she met
Terry Wode coming out of a saloon.

“A little appetizer,” he murmured, wiping his lips.

“Aren’t you pretty far uptown?” June reproved him. “And I thought that
you weren’t going to do any investigating without me.”

Terry was a feature writer whom June had met while she was working on
the Clarion, with whom she had often joined forces while on an
assignment. Some time before, they had started what they called an
investigation of all the saloons, between the Battery and Canal Street
and the East and North Rivers. By limiting themselves thus they had
hopes of some day visiting them all. (But they had not finished their
explorations before prohibition went into effect.)

“Why, it’s only twelve o’clock and you know I never begin my
investigations until two. As I said, I merely dropped in to build up an
appetite for lunch and if you’ll come in and have a glass of port I’ll
take you along. You’ll have an opportunity of meeting Mr. Hugh Brace,
assistant managing editor of the Flame. I’ve got to hand in the stuff
for the dramatic page today.”

“Sure, I’d love to. But I’ve already got an appetite and don’t want to
drink. You’re only looking for a chance and an excuse to go back into a
saloon again.”

As they entered a German restaurant on Third Avenue, a young man rose
from his table to meet them.

Hugh Brace was a tall, slightly-built youth who was thirty-three and
looked twenty-three. There was a look of great delicacy about him, an
appearance of living in the night hours and sleeping during the day. As
a matter of fact most of his work was done at night, not only on his own
writing, but his editorial work on the Flame, a monthly magazine.

An artist who had the conviction that Hugh would become famous—as a
matter of fact most of his friends had that conviction—had painted a
life-size portrait of him several years before and in it brought out his
extremely dusky transparency. There was almost a greenish light on his
face. You did not notice the color of his hair or eyes. They were
contradictory eyes. They were curiously detached and yet luminously
sympathetic.

During the course of the lunch June noticed that his clothes as well as
his manners had the same awkwardness. It came, she thought, from extreme
shyness, and remained with him even when he forgot himself in the heat
of discussion. Behind his writing desk, he had poise. With a pen in his
hand he was gracious as well as graceful. He lost neither his dignity
nor his train of thought when interrupted even when he had fulfilled the
expectations of his friends and did become famous, giving up his
magazine work to spend eight hours a day or an entire night, as the case
may be, at his desk. For back of his apparent softness there was a
streak of iron and he was never ill.

“Tomorrow the magazine goes to press,” he told them, “and I am short two
book reviews. Have you got your ‘copy’ with you, Terry?”

Terry produced his “copy.” As dramatic critic, he didn’t feel called
upon to confine his attention to the current plays on Broadway. He had
found himself down on the Bowery near the Italian burlesque show not
many weeks before and the result was a criticism and comparison of that
production with the latest success of Broadway. Terry did not generally
call himself a dramatic critic. He preferred to think of himself as a
critic of life and there was much philosophy of a sort in his articles.
His style reminded June of Robert Ingersoll. While the latter directed
his criticism at the theology of the day, Terry hurled defiance and
ridicule at the conventions of the world. All his energy he seemed to
put in his writing.

After Terry’s contribution had been read and discussed Hugh reverted to
his own troubles. “I’ve got one review planned out pretty well,” he
said. “There are really only three ways of writing reviews. Usually you
have to struggle to make the book fit into one of the three reviews—that
is, if it is worth reviewing. As a matter of fact this one falls in
perfectly with one of them and it’s as good as written now. It’s the
story of a man’s spiritual development, and you can take the personal
view. You test its worth by applying your personal experience. The man
in the story finally comes to believe in a God—strange, but it’s a book
that’s making a big sale with young soldiers on their way to the front.

“We all have a God of one kind or another. At one time, my God was a
socialist ideal. Just now I find myself a Tolstoian without accepting
his idea of a personal Deity. But it’s wartime and our only ideal can be
internationalism.

“But, damn it! That doesn’t solve the question of where I’m going to get
another review to fill those extra two pages. I don’t feel as though I’m
going to write more than that one I’m interested in.”

“I’ve just been reading a book that I’d like to review,” June put in.

Hugh looked at her hopefully.

“It’s an old copy of ‘Aurora Leigh’ that I picked up in a second-hand
store over on Third Avenue, printed in eighteen seventy-seven or
thereabouts. I’ve read ‘Aurora Leigh’ before and it’s been reviewed
before. But this is an exceptional copy. There’s nothing like it in the
world. Better than any first edition. It’s a present some young woman
made to a friend of hers fifty years ago, but before she made the gift
she went through it calling attention to different parts of it in
marginal notes. And it seems from the notes that both of them were
ardent suffragettes and indignant at the part they had to play in life
as stay-at-homes.”

“That sounds as though it would be amusing,” Hugh said enthusiastically.
“We could call it ‘Review of the marginal notes in an old edition of
Aurora Leigh’. You couldn’t have it done by tomorrow, could you?”

“Sure,” June agreed willingly. “I’m so interested in the book that it
would be easy to write a review of it. I thought of it in fact, but was
too lazy to do it. Now that there is some reason for it and somebody
wants it, I’ll get right to work.”

A week after that Hugh Brace telephoned June at her office inviting her
to lunch with him the next day. When she met him in a little restaurant
near the “Flame” office, he showed her the proof of her review and it
looked far more dignified to her than any of the signed “stories” that
she had seen under her name in the Clarion. Only her initials were
signed to it.

“And now,” said Hugh, “how would you like to have a steady editorial
position on the Flame? Do you know anything about make-up or type or
proof reading? No. Well those things don’t matter because I can teach
them to you very easily. What really matters is whether you have good
taste and from the tone of your review, I think you have. You can’t tell
anything from your newspaper work, you know. Journalism is beyond taste,
it seems to me.”

That was how June felt about it.

“What we want is literary taste and I guess you have it. Alaric is going
to spend most of the summer lecturing in the west on poetry—woman’s
clubs, you know, and I’ve kicked about the burden of work falling on me.
So he’s agreed to pay ten dollars a week to someone who will assist me.”

“And what’ll I have to do?” asked June breathless.

“Well, the simplest thing is to read proof every month after the
material has gone to the press. You’ve got to be very careful about
that. We’re exceptionally meticulous. We can’t afford good paper, so we
pay as much attention to the printing and make-up as we can.

“Every day you read the contributions that come into the office, sending
back most of them of course. Those that aren’t any good go back with
printed slips. If you like what is sent in in the way of poetry or story
or article and yet think that it isn’t good enough to print or suited to
the magazine, you can write a little note to send back with it. We don’t
pay for anything we accept, so we have to be as appreciative as we have
time to be.

“You also interview the people that come to the office to see me or any
other editor, taking the place of a private secretary which none of us
has ever had. In general you add to the dignity of the office. And of
course every month you’ll have to have one or two reviews written. I
dummy up the magazine and I’ll show you how to do it so you can help.”

“You’ll have to show me how to write book reviews,” June told him. “You
said there were three ways, but you only told me one of them. I
understand how that one is done all right, but I don’t think that I’d
have self-confidence enough to write a book review in the first person,
applying my personal experience to it as a test of worth.”

There was no need to say whether or not she would accept the position.
The expression on her face when Hugh mentioned it told him that. He told
her before they parted that he was sorry her pay would be five dollars
less than she had received on the Clarion but that she would work only
five hours a day most of the month.

June had a feeling that she had graduated from journalism, and mentally
agreed with her father, when she set out to her afternoon assignments,
that newspaper work was not a job for a woman. She almost strutted.

June took it for granted the next Monday when she set out for the Flame
office that her duties began at nine. Her first eagerness for this new
and responsible position made her wake up hours too early. It was still
dark but there was a softness about the sky which pressed against the
window, promising dawn. Too drowsy to get out of bed to look at her
watch on the bureau, she lay there, watching the window. The shades had
been left up, contrary to her custom, for she was used to sleeping late
and she wished the first light to awaken her. As she watched, the sky
changed to violet, then became sickly pale. There was a sudden chirping
of birds on the neighboring housetops.

From the river came the sound of a man whistling the Star Spangled
Banner, all out of tune. He was silent and the river seemed empty. Then
a tug sneezed violently. A few coughs of the engine, a grating and
creaking against the pier, clearly heard although it was two blocks
away, and a gentle rhythmical chugging and steaming. A man called out.
Someone answered. Then the boat swished past leaving only the tentative
caress of the waves against the little beach; like a baby’s lips
pressing against its mother’s breast when it is not quite hungry, June
thought. A tender, happy sound. And she lay there and appreciated her
simile until the first rays of the sun reddened the room.

It was good to live in the daylight again. Although she had forced
herself to rise every morning at eleven while she was working on the
Clarion, she felt that she had lived at night for seven months. It was
springtime, and early morning, so she hopped out of bed, splashed
through her bathing, mended a pair of stockings and dressed. By this
time it was seven o’clock. Whistling almost as disjointedly as the man
on the river had, she started out, reflecting that she had time to walk
to the office.

Breakfasts at seven in April always taste good to you. Both the month
and the hour are in their favor. Poached eggs on toast, the latter thick
with fresh butter, coffee that is half milk, the paper which has the
most features in it propped up against the water carafe before you. You
can get such a breakfast in some of the East Side Jewish bakeries. The
very sounds of the elevated, the people in the street, the waiter beside
the steaming coffee urn, are crisp.

It takes three-quarters of an hour to read and appreciate a newspaper
thoroughly. It was after eight when June was swinging along the
strangely clear sidewalks of Fifth Avenue and exactly nine when she
passed the thirty-sixth block and reached Fourteenth Street where the
office was then situated.

The elevator boy looked very drowsy to June who was glowing. On the
fourth floor where the three office rooms were there was a complete
silence. From behind the desk at one of the windows, a girl’s head
popped up.

June named herself.

“O-o-oh! You’re Miss Henreddy. Mr. Brace told me that you’d be around
this morning. But he ought to have told you—nine o’clock is awfully
early for the Flame. I got here early to-day because I left a book here
that I was reading and I wanted to go on with it.” She held out “Ann
Veronica.” “I’m the stenographer. The business manager gets here at ten
and the advertising manager about noon. And Mr. Brace—we never know what
time to expect him. Lots of times he works at home.”

After showing June into the office which she was to share with Mr.
Brace, the latter returned to the business office and “Ann Veronica,”
leaving June to survey with pride her new domain.

There were four tables in the room, two of them stacked with drawings,
manuscripts and proofs in the utmost confusion. Huge drawings stood
against the wall, reprints of the same drawings were tacked around the
room. On four sides, two shelves had been built and these were crowded
with books that had been reviewed, as June could tell by the titles, and
books to be reviewed. The one window in the room looked out over Union
Square’s battleship.

June explored thoroughly and then sat down at her desk which held a pile
of opened mail six inches high. Evidently Mr. Brace didn’t care for
reading manuscripts. She did not wonder, as she read them carefully at
first and then more swiftly, signing her initials to rejection blanks
and enclosing them in return envelopes with their luckless
contributions.

One page held these three:

*PASSERSBY*

**

*There were two of them,*

*tight-corseted,*

*tight-lipped,*

*tight-minded,*

**

*jealous*

*of my loose dress,*

*loose breasts,*

*loose morals*

*the lover at my side.*

**

**

*A BROWN STONE FRONT*

**

*My apartment house*

*stands like an old horse*

*that is being curried*

*Two men are shearing off its coat.*

**

**

*THE MONKEY*

**

*Pennies,*

*Lice,*

*Garlic and Waterspouts—*

*When I would swing by my tail from the treetops*

*Life keeps a cord*

*About my neck.*

Bad as the poems were, June took an enthusiastic interest in all of
them. Mr. Brace had said that she was to write letters to those whose
work seemed worthy of criticism if not publication and she ventured a
few replies, not to be sent however until they had been approved. The
work was engrossing, and it was one o’clock before she knew it. By two
she had finished the stack, and selecting a book from the shelves which
she thought she would like to review for the next number, she proceeded
to lunch.

Mr. Brace did not appear in the office for several days and June
continued the work which he had pointed out to her at her leisure. She
took to arriving at ten, answering the mail and reading by the open
window which looked out over Union Square. Artists dropped in now and
then, bringing drawings for the next number of the magazine and stopped
to chat.

There was a little round-faced, round-bodied man with a curl on the top
of his head like one of the Katzenjammer kids. He was the best
cartoonist on the staff and in addition to running a comic monthly
magazine of his own, represented a large capitalist monthly, for which
he drew political cartoons.

There were two serious young artists, one an American Jew and another a
Hungarian, who often came together for an hour’s gossip with Brace or
June, whoever happened to be in the office.

The younger group of radicals that June met every day no longer talked
of the war. That had already been declared. Now it was the draft which
followed upon the heels of the declaration on April first. Registration
day was June fifth. Were they to register? If they were consistently
opposed to war, it was inconsistent to register. Registering and taking
the chance that they wouldn’t be conscripted and so have to plead
conscientious objection seemed cowardly. Not to register would make them
fugitives from the law.

Sometimes June lunched with them and sometimes Ivan and Chester called
her on the telephone and she met them at what was their breakfast and
her lunch.

Poets came in and sat on the desk swinging their feet and declaiming,
or, if they had their poems with them, reading aloud.

But these were only the accredited members of the staff and their
friends. Other poets, and other artists came diffidently and asked her
advice as to markets and the kind of work the “Flame” wanted. And June
was both condescending and pitiful.

After the first few days when Brace did show up, he looked pale and
puffy eyed. “I always loaf a bit after getting the magazine out every
month,” he told her.

“You don’t look as though you have been loafing,” June told him.

“Not exactly. Loafing on the job, I meant. I’ve been writing for the
last couple of nights and couldn’t sleep in the day.”

He fidgeted around desultorily for a while, approved of the letters that
June had written, glanced over the contributions that she had laid to
one side for him, and then threw his pen down in disgust.

“I’ve got to do something. This infernal restlessness. Worked myself out
and you can’t get drunk in the springtime. It goes against the grain
somehow. What’ll we do?” and he turned to June appealingly.

“Goldman and Ulan were in a little while ago and they were starting out
for a tramp up the Hudson. You might walk off your feelings.”

He chuckled as he jumped out of his chair and went out into the business
office. When he returned he had the business manager and the advertising
manager with him. It was an unusual occurrence but all three were in the
office at the same time.

“All decided. We’ve dismissed the office force, in other words the
stenographer and bookkeeper, and we four will go on a picnic over in New
Jersey. I’ve got a little old shack there which I retire to in moments
of stress.” Brace was radiant.

“I think I should like to forget free verse for a while,” June sighed,
stretching tremendously. “It makes me so angry after I’ve read a hundred
samples, that I get all tense from holding myself in. Back here,” and
June located the tenseness in the back of her neck, “and ‘specially
here,” and she rubbed her jaw.

“Chuck the work in the drawer,” Hugh told her briskly. “That tense
feeling is just what I’ve been recovering from. After a number as full
of ‘suppressed sex’ verse and ‘obscene art’ as this one has been, I feel
like going home and writing healthy romances in the style of Marion
Crawford. And when I get there I find myself putting down on paper the
same ideas the ‘Flame’ is full of. It’s a good thing for the novel I’m
writing that I don’t realize it until I’ve been at it for three days.
Then I have to get out for fear I’ll tear it up. After a picnic,” he
ended cheerfully, “I’ll go back thinking I’m the equal of Anatole
France. And so continue the great work.”

The obscene pictures which Hugh referred to was called to the paper’s
attention that morning by the post office department, the American
censor of the arts, for whom a sample copy of the magazine had to be
made up from page proofs before the edition was allowed to go to press.
It was an ordinary picture of a nude woman, ordinary to the “Flame,” at
least, which appreciated nudity, and the fact that the artist was an
upright middle-aged American who was more appreciated abroad than he was
in America, mattered little to the censor.

“We’ve got to do something about that picture,” observed the business
manager now that his attention had been called to it. “What’ll it be?
Have the printer block it out?”

“That’s entirely too simple to be clever,” Brace reproved. “I’ve got a
much better idea. I thought of it after you had telephoned to me this
morning.” He took out one of those fashion books which are stacked in
the doors of department stores as he spoke. “I stopped in Wanamaker’s as
I passed,” he explained. And he picked up a pair of scissors and turning
to a page of fashionable dresses he began to cut one out very carefully.

“Lovely idea,” June observed. “It reminds me of the time that I cut out
paper dolls. Mother used to bring us home some of those every time she
went downtown.”

The other two watched him fascinated. Not having played with paper dolls
in their youth they did not know what Hugh was about to do.

“There! It is just the right size, you see.” And he took the original
drawing of the nude figure and pasted it from neck to shin. “I’m sure
the artist won’t mind my defacing his original. Anything to put
something over on the post office . . . . Now if you’ll just send this
down to the engraver’s and have him make a plate of it and give him word
to send it to the printer’s they can substitute this for the original.”
Brace surveyed the ridiculous result of his work with a great deal of
satisfaction.

All they had to do to prepare the picnic was to stop in a butcher and
grocery shop and buy supplies. “We’ll put it down on general expenses,”
the business manager observed as he paid for the purchases. “We’re short
on household expenses.”

For the three men clubbed together as the advertising manager put it, in
order that they might live in the style to which they were accustomed
without exceeding their meager salaries.

That day was a long day of talk—mostly about themselves.

Daniel Sloane, the advertising manager, was a tall, phlegmatic Hollander
who had lived most of his youth in Texas. He was a graduate of Harvard
and when he was consciously conversing, you could detect a trace of what
is known as the “Harvard accent” in his enunciation. There was more than
a hint of the Southwestern in his speech for he had worked in a small
town in the west before he had earned enough money to go to Harvard, and
you could tell that he spoke Dutch with his family by a slight foreign
note in his voice.

At the time when June was in the university town Daniel had been driving
an ambulance car in France. Six months of service at the front resulted
in shell shock. At this time, the shattering of his nerves was still
noticeable, but he was making continual efforts to get back. He had no
sympathy with the “Flame” but being something of a Jesuit in his
principles, he worked to live. Now that war was declared by America he
never let up in his endeavor to enlist in any form of active service.

Before the war he had had the same dogged enthusiasm for writing plays
with the same dogged determination to have them produced. Although he no
longer wrote—war did not admit of voluntarily pursuing one’s personal
ambition—he never lost faith in what he had written and the greatest
mark of friendship that he could have possibly shown, he showed to June.
He gave her two of his plays to read. They were good plays to read, she
knew that, but she knew too little about the production of them to
criticize from more than a literary standpoint. She criticized them
diffidently, for although she could imagine writing a book or a short
story, she could not imagine herself writing a play. And when some one
else did what was impossible to her, she respected them accordingly.

Daniel had two complexes, as Hugh in his enthusiasm for psycho-analysis
often pointed out to him. One was a persecution complex. That was in
regard to his writing. The other was a chastity complex.

For Daniel, as Tolstoi put it, had “whored a great deal in his youth.”
That was the general idea which he managed to convey to June in the
course of their friendship. From the way in which he talked of that
revered institution which he had attended, June drew the conclusion that
looseness was no part of it. Texas was connected with Daniel’s early
life, and the only deduction you could draw from Daniel’s talk was that
Texas was as iniquitous a place as the legended California in the days
of the gold strike.

Hugh was an ardent feminist. June was much more in sympathy with what he
had to say than she was with the haphazard talk of the “little group” in
the university in their discussions of free love and single standards.
When he talked of the necessity of a love life for woman, irrespective
of marriage, she found him much more intelligible than she had found
women writers on the subject. There were long arguments as to why a
young woman should not remain in a virginal state after she had felt the
first tingling of desire.

“If I had followed your line of reasoning,” June told Hugh indignantly,
“I should have lost my virtue at the age of twelve. I was far more
conscious of sex at that time (and once again a few years later) than I
ever have been since. And that was because I knew nothing about it. It
was a thing that wasn’t mentioned in polite society. Radicals are so
free in their discussions and I’ve heard so much about sex that it loses
in importance the more I learn. It’s no longer a temptation to indulge
desire. It isn’t forbidden. You speak of it as a supremely right thing
to do—to take a lover or as many lovers as you want. It is, but it isn’t
heroic. I shouldn’t feel brave and untrammeled and all that if I went in
for lovers. Just because it isn’t forbidden. We can’t think about
society and the condemnation of society because we don’t live in it.
Look at the people I know, the people I came in contact with on the
‘Clarion’ and the people I meet around the ‘Flame.’ Anything short of
absolute promiscuity is disregarded as long as you can speak of sexual
relationships as love affairs.

“When they gossip you hear them say, ‘Have you heard the latest?
Beatrice has left Charlie, or do you think he left her? And now she’s
living with Bertram. I wonder how long it will last.—Oh, wasn’t she the
one who lived with Jim Albright for three years?’

“Or if you mention the name of some woman, somebody immediately speaks
up—‘Who is she living with now?’

“Oh, I wish I could meet some one who would tempt me very insidiously to
give up my virtue, persuading me to wickedness that was lovely just
because it was wickedness!”

Hugh was a subtle antagonist and usually June could find nothing to say
to his arguments. She could not even take the attitude of Daniel who
held up purity as an ideal with almost Biblical fervor. He talked as she
had heard Ellen talk many times. Even if she had wished to combat
Daniel’s arguments, she could not have done so, for logic was not one of
her gifts. From her knowledge of it (confined to Jevon’s handbook) she
was inclined to think that reason predominated on the side of Hugh. It
was hard to find where instinct came in.

Hugh’s premise was that virginity was a state of dishonesty and it was
only by living in a state of unreality that virginity continued.

June could only say that she was sure she was an honest person and that
she had always faced reality.

“What you mean by facing reality,” Hugh told her, “is facing the more
intellectual discussion of sex. As a matter of fact you are an utter
coward when it comes to acknowledging your own feelings and the
recognition of their importance in your life.”

June could only repeat what she had said before, that she had had no
“feelings” since she was fifteen.

Whereupon Hugh regarded her lithe young body for several seconds and
then gave a supercilious snort.

“You make me furious with your pose of cool indifference; I know you’re
an exotic person. Don’t you suppose my feelings tell me something? It
isn’t that *I* want you—”

“Now you’re lying,” she caught him up quickly. “Even if I’m not seething
with feelings of suppressed sex, I can recognize different forms of
approach. The poetical, the primitive, the psychic, the intellectual and
your combination of them which I can only call logical. But I must say
that I like the simpler forms better. They at least allow of some
illusion.”

That summer, similar conversations took place just as often in public
with Daniel and Kenneth Graves (the business manager) as listeners, as
in private. And June was delighted at the opportunity to point out to
him, with her new found knowledge of Freudian theories that he was
something of an exhibitionist in his love-making. Or as one jealous
rival put it in a moment of irritation, Hugh’s love encounters should
really take place on the stage of the Hippodrome before a packed house.

During these discussions, Kenneth would sit curled up on a sofa, drawing
consolation from the stem of a wet briar, making noises which were at
first irritating to June, and which afterwards she associated with a
singing teakettle or a purring cat. Although he was inarticulate, he
managed to convey his appreciation of what was being said by a few
rumbled words which nobody understood or paid any attention to. Somehow,
in his person he reflected New England and was a thoroughly good young
man. Without in any way modifying his own ideas or his life to conform
to the ideas of those around him, he was tolerant and appreciative of
his friends.

June’s intimacy with those three grew from a suggestion made by Hugh at
the close of that picnic day, a suggestion prompted by a view to
economy.

“You cannot possibly live and clothe yourself on ten dollars a week,”
Hugh told her thoughtfully. “Besides a salary of such dimensions savours
of capitalistic exploitation. Daniel and Kenneth and I, as you probably
know, have rented a furnished apartment from a friend of ours for the
summer at practically nothing so as to keep down our own expenses. And
we’ve decided that the only thing lacking around there is a woman.
Kenneth sleeps on a couch in the dining-room and Daniel and I have
separate couches in the living-room. Besides a kitchen, there is a big
hall bedroom which is quite unnecessary, so why don’t you come down and
live there? Your only responsibilities, my dear, will be to be silent in
the morning and fairly agreeable in the evening. We’ll all take turns at
cooking and bed-making, Yes, even the dish-washing.”

This was the beginning of the “ménage au quatre” which miraculously
worked from inception and was their boast to friends and even
acquaintances. Hugh’s theoretically love-making, Kenneth’s vicious pipe,
Daniel’s lectures on chastity and June’s almost irrepressible desire to
sing before breakfast did not seriously disturb the friendship of the
four. And the arrangement continued till the “Flame” with many other
radical publications was abolished by the government in the fall of that
year.

Breakfasts were at eight every morning and June for courtesy’s sake was
conceded the first bath. She always felt so fresh after her cold plunge
that it usually fell to her to run around the corner to buy the papers
and go to the little French bakery for brioche. By the time she had
returned, the others had jumped in the tub and out, had set the table
and made the coffee. Immediately scrambled eggs and tomatoes had been
established as the staple breakfast food and these Daniel prepared. Hugh
made the coffee and it was Kenneth that set the table. He acknowledged
that he was worthless as a cook but June comforted him by saying he was
the only man she ever saw who could set a table properly without
forgetting anything that was necessary.

They ate with newspapers propped before them and cigarettes near at hand
to add the finishing touch to the meal. It was an attractive breakfast
room. The table had been painted bright orange and the chairs were
black. There was matting on the floor and a wide low couch was the only
other furniture of the room. Japanese prints and old brass candlesticks
and lamps were the only ornaments.

In the evening when one of the four brought home guests, which happened
practically every night, it was understood that he should bring with him
extra food. There was always steak. That Hugh insisted on for he often
worked all night and went to bed after breakfast. June contributed
strange-looking vegetables which no one knew how to cook and the recipes
of the Italian grocer were seldom satisfactory. Kenneth favored
complicated pastries of Greek, Turkish or French origin and Daniel saw
to it that there were sensible and well known things such as potatoes
and salad.

The meals were always successful. There were editors and authors, and
artists who always had to be prevented from drawing on the attractive
surface of the table.

There were nights when every one insisted upon assisting with the
dishes, to hasten matters, thereby hindering them, and the big orange
table, which could seat twelve was cleared for cards. Around the
corner—you could buy everything around the corner—someone bought
“stingers,” cocktails which were supposed to be especially insidious,
but which only made June more than ever cautious at poker. She was
always a cautious player. She realized that she had to be or one of the
three others of the ménage (peremptorily fraternal) would order her out
of the game. She never allowed herself to lose more than five dollars of
her weekly salary and she seldom allowed that. For there were always
preconceived purposes to which the salary was to be devoted.

More often discussion was the rule, the war, the Russian revolution,
especially the draft. For all the men who came to the house were of
draft age and the matter was of such importance to them that June
regretted that she wasn’t a man also in order that she might have such a
mighty matter on her conscience.

The night before registration day was one which she would never forget.
Russell was there, that adventurous romantic who had rushed to the thick
of the trouble in Mexico and who afterwards was to become an important
figure in the revolution in Russia and lose his life there.

Remington, a blithe freelancer who spoke with a lisp and who had written
three books of criticism on music before he was twenty-eight. Afterwards
he became a newspaper correspondent and travelled and disappeared in
that fascinating bit of Russian territory, Georgia.

His wife, a plain-looking short-haired girl with a cunning chuckle, who
went there to look for him and who many years after found him living the
life of a mystic in India.

Bonwit, a black-haired silent boy of twenty-two who was later imprisoned
in Germany where he was sent as a correspondent for a radical
publication.

And a young Jewish student from Columbia who served three days for
publishing an anti-conscription pamphlet, who later escaped the draft by
fleeing to Mexico, who somehow managed to get into Russia to attend the
Third International and who finally decided he preferred life on a
Mexican plantation.

His wife, a soft-eyed Gentile, who went with him as far as his first
trip to Mexico and then eloped with an artist to Spain.

And that artist, big, blustering and pro-German, somehow unpopular
although he was a good landscape painter and contributed every month to
the “Flame.”

More attractive, Francis Stubble, an editorial writer and authority on
international politics. His face was curiously bloated and grey and
looked as though a depression would remain if you poked your finger in
his cheek.

All decided against registration in that discussion which lasted until
three in the morning. And then next morning, bright and early, they
registered. It was better to prolong their usefulness in the radical
world by sacrificing their principles, was their argument.

The women who came to the house were various. For instance, there were
Hugh’s former sweethearts and June decided that it was a point in his
favor, much as she disliked his idea of love-making, that they continued
their friendship with him in after life, and even with each other. One
married, not long after June met her and went to live in the middle west
and raise babies. She was the sweetest of them all, June thought. She
was delicately immaculate, both mentally and physically, and somehow
reminded you of Galsworthy’s heroines.

Another was a tall, voluptuous brunette with a deep soft voice. She
would sing after dinner—love lyrics and negro spirituals, strange,
twisted fragments of tunes. You thought of low soft couches, the Nile,
jades and scarabs and sandalwood perfume.

There was one adorable little thing with fluffy blonde hair, blue eyes
and a thin little face. There was a flyaway look about her and you felt
ponderous when with her. Perhaps that was why Hugh and she lived
together for only two months.

The evenings were not all devoted to dinner parties. Daniel liked to
visit burlesque shows occasionally, although once when he and June and
Kenneth went to one on Fourteenth Street, he got up and walked out
because too much emphasis was laid on the osculatory habits of the
French comedian. Daniel was fiercely pro-French. The war seemed to enter
into everything.

Kenneth developed a penchant (he called it that himself) for riding on
Staten Island ferry boats, and, if the night were especially warm,
continuing to South Beach on the front seat of an open car. If it was
hot, the four of them and whoever else happened to be along, threw off
their clothes on the dark beach and scampered into the surf. It was
quite black and June did not feel that she was being immodest.

There was even a night at Coney Island, and Hugh, who had never been
there before, insisted on riding on all the roller coasters and kissing
June in the tunnels. And they all squealed at each steep descent.

From the many holidays they took to celebrate nothing in particular you
would naturally think that no work was done at the “Flame” office. But
the manuscripts were read and returned, book reviews were written, the
accepted contributions sent to the printer and engraver, and the
magazine came out as usual once a month.

On a magazine dealing with ideas about the news of the month rather than
the news itself, exciting things do not happen with enough frequency to
make them commonplace. Newspaper life is crammed with events, which
taken by themselves would provide ideal situations around which to write
many novels. But they come so thick and fast that they lose in emphasis.
When June had worked on the “Flame” for six months she began to feel as
though she were regaining perspective.

There was excitement though. For instance, one of the artists drew at
random a picture of two women, one upright and lofty, looking to the
horizon, the other kneeling at her feet and gazing up at her wistfully.

“Didn’t draw anything for this issue,” he told Hugh vaguely. “I was
working on a portrait. Can you use this, do you think?” and he drew the
picture of the two women from his portfolio.

“We need a cover for this issue and that ought to show up well.”

And the drawing was accepted as listlessly as it had been offered for it
was a hot day and no one cared much whether the August number had a
cover on it or not.

Later, in view of the trouble with the suffragists in Washington, Hugh
decided to call it “the militant” with the result that when the magazine
appeared on the newsstands it caught the eye of the suffrage party who
immediately ordered five thousand copies of the drawing, and afterwards
bought the original to hang at headquarters. There was much enthusiasm
around the office that day for the artist was a poor man.

Twice also within the last year (but this was before June joined) the
issues of the paper had aroused much excitement. Once for a Christmas
poem about Mary and more especially about the nobility of Joseph who
married her when she was pregnant and in danger of disgrace. There was
also a picture of Christ on the cover with the announcement “Christ will
speak in Brotherhood Hall.” Unfortunately, the men at the head of the
company who controlled the newsstands in the subway and elevated
stations were Catholics and objected to the issue. And now the “Flame”
was no longer sold on the stands which they owned.

Another month a large clothing firm gave a full page advertisement to
the magazine, offering prizes for the best essays written on several
economic subjects. They had made a custom of offering prizes every year,
but the “Flame” had never been one of the magazines to carry the
advertisement. The post office took this occasion to stop the number
stating as a reason that the magazine was advertising a lottery. None of
the other magazines which carried the advertisement received any notice
whatever.

After war was declared the capitalist press took every opportunity to
sneer at the radical monthly. One month a full column called attention
to a bit of verse written by one of the editors which poeticized the
hungry passion of a middle-aged woman at that period in her life which
is more often treated by doctors and pathologists than by poets. The
poem appealed to June’s erotic sensibilities but she did not much blame
the newspaper for its jostling comment. The editors themselves took it,
as they took all adverse criticism, as free advertisement.

Then, as the magazine daily received more attention, and the circulation
steadily rose till it was higher than it had ever been before, the post
office delayed the issues more frequently, and more reluctantly released
them. With the end of September, came federal officers and all the back
numbers of the magazine, the material for the next number, all the
contributions which were in the editorial office and all the books and
correspondence of the business office were confiscated. The end had
come. Every one knew that even before more federal officers came with
warrants for five of the editors and two outside contributors. June felt
rather out of it—for she did not regard the arrests at all
seriously—until she also received a slip of paper which proved to be a
subpoena. The date of the trial had not been set, but until after the
trial she would feel that her work on the “Flame” was not yet over.
Meanwhile, there was nothing to do.
