% The Listener
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1933, pp. 1,8

*Summary: Notes labor unrest and growing awareness of inequalities in
the social system. Lauds doing what one can, quoting saints. (DDLW
\#884).*

ECONOMY
-------

"We are making every possible economy in all directions, which include
adjustment in salaries and rotation of employment. We have no bonus plan
or special compensation given in addition to the salaries of either
officers or employees," says H.S. Wilkinson, Chairman of the Board of
Directors of the Crucible Steel Company of America at the annual meeting
of the stockholders in May.

"Reports we get by telephone indicate steel operations this week showed
a marked increase all along the line," he added.

Meanwhile the Communists are busily doing their best to organize the
steel industry. Low salaries and unemployment, the "every possible
economy in all directions" Mr. Wilkinson talked about, are making such
organization possible.

About sixty per cent of the steel workers are unemployed and less than
two per cent are organized, according to charges made by a new steel
union, organized by Communists, which now has a membership of 3,500
members. There are 577,000 steel workers. Of those working, many are
working on the stagger plan, many as little as one day every two weeks.
Wages have been cut; relief is almost non-existent. The average is one
dollar a week for a family of five or six, and this is rarely in cash.
Unmarried steel workers receive no relief. Organization of any kind,
even by the old union, the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Tin and
Steel Workers, is fought by the steel industry. No stranger is permitted
to remain in company towns without investigation. Meetings and
organization are forbidden and organizers of every kind must function
under cover.

DOING THEIR BIT
---------------

People are becoming conscious of the inequalities of the social system
and are awakening to their responsibility toward their neighbor. Down in
Staten Island a young manager of one of the Roulston's stores was fired
with no explanation. He was the only one in the family working and his
father was a cripple. The neighbors and all the people who traded at
Roulston's organized a protest, and keeping the petition at an adjacent
butcher shop they got signatures from everyone who came in, to send to
the management of the store, asking for his reinstatement. A year or so
ago they would not have been so alive to the need for social action.

BEST OR NOTHING?
----------------

"The best is the enemy of the good," Father Joseph P. McSorley quoted to
us in talking over the first number of THE CATHOLIC WORKER. He was
translating from the Italian and the little saying was by way of
pointing out that it was pleasing in the sight of God to do the good one
could and not to neglect doing that because of ambitious desire to do
the "best."

Don Bosco felt that way about it too. In his biography we read about a
friend of the great Italian who always wished to do the very best, and
how Don Bosco always went ahead on the other hand and did what he could,
piling up achievement after achievement with his very small and humble
beginnings. To make a start, that was the thing. Not to wait until it
was possible to make the perfect thing.

And just a few Sundays ago we heard a little talk from a parish priest
down in Staten Island. He was talking to the children about their
posture in kneeling and the necessity for a vehement Amen to the final
prayers said by the priest at the foot of the altar.

"Snap to it!" he had shouted, right in the midst of those final prayers.
It was the children's Mass and he kept them afterwards for a talk,
telling them that if they didn't do a thing right instead of
half-heartedly, they might as well stay outside the door.

And I thought sadly, if we waited to pray until we had the fervor of a
saint, we'd wait a long time.

The great St. Teresa wrote in her autobiography of the thoughts which
were like "little gnats which buzz about by night here and there," and
troubled her at her prayers. "Against this evil I know no remedy," she
said. "The sole remedy which I met with, after having wearied myself for
many years is… to consider the memory no better than a madman, and to
leave it alone with its folly, for God alone can check out its
extravagances."

*St. Thomas Aquinas declared that, for the practice of virtue, a certain
amount of good was indispensible…. Cardinal Manning said that God's
commandments could not be preached to men without empty stomachs.* –
Abbe Lugan.
