% Republic Strikers Still Out/Day After Day
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1937, pp. 1,2

*Summary: Supports strikes but not using violence by strikers or company
guards. Quotes Norman Thomas on our violent history. Keywords:
non-violence, labor (DDLW \#906).*

Traveling as I have been this last month across the country, impressions
crowd so fast upon me that it is hard to get them all down. I have
arrived now in Los Angeles and have settled down for a month at the home
of Dr. Julia Metcalfe and her sister who have a Catholic circulating
library and Monday night meetings, and through whose efforts, George
Putnam has been able to get the Los Angeles branch of the Catholic
Worker under way.

Steel Workers
-------------

Going through my suitcase, I come across a receipt signed by John
Brezina, J. Skaroupka, P. Wincheff, and Paolo Giordano, steel workers
still on strike at the Republic Steel mills in Cleveland where there are
a thousand men still out and where there are a thousand families
suffering want.

A Benedictine priest accompanied me, and a group of men gathered so that
there was almost a round table discussion then and there. They have a
big headquarters, a store, where the men have been meeting and where
groceries are distributed once a week by the basketful to the families
who have not been put on relief. Clothes are badly needed for the
children, and we ask our school groups throughout the country to make up
bundles and send them on to them, care of the CIO headquarters, 43^rd^
and Broadway, Cleveland, Ohio.

Violence
--------

Brezina, president of his local told us how one afternoon a mob of
guards from the steel plant descended on the headquarters and beat up
everyone who was there, men, women and children, so that over a hundred
of them had to be taken to the hospital. This happened a couple of
months ago and I suppose was reported in the papers as one of the
"riots" attendant on the steel strike. In protesting against violence in
strikes, most of the public do not know that these riots are in reality
mob beatings inflicted by armed guards to discredit the strikes by
shouting about reds, some comments of Norman Thomas in his book *Human
Exploitation* are in order. (Reader please note: In quoting from this
book we by no means endorse the political views of Mr. Thomas to which
we are as strongly opposed as we are to the Dictatorship of the
Proletariat. The book itself is just a very good analysis of human
exploitation. Ed.'s note.)

Causes
------

"Agitators have their uses and perhaps their abuses, but no agitator or
group of agitators of any color from the blue of the NRA eagle which so
perturbs the Chicago *Tribune*, to the pink or red of far more radical
organizations, could have produced or supported the wave of strikes
which in 1934 swept along with it fruit pickers in California; the
wretched onion pickers of Hardin county, Ohio; dairy farmers in
Wisconsin and New York; longshoremen and marine workers in Texas and the
west coast; truckmen in Minneapolis; street car employees in Milwaukee;
the auto-lite factory workers in Toledo and a half million textile
workers all over the country.

No Fun
------

"Strikes aren't fun. They are grim work. They require an endurance and
heroism of men and women and even children far nobler than the heroism
of war. Their heroes are not individuals but the mass of workers."

In regard to violence in labor tactics, Mr. Thomas says: "Even the old
I.W.W. in the days of its greatest militancy, probably won more by
unarmed mass demonstrations, leading to wholesale arrests which crowded
the jails, than by more violent tactics. Oftentimes it has been proved
that the way to keep strikers from getting out of hand and acting as a
mob is not to denounce violence but to organize meetings and non violent
demonstrations."

"Unquestionably the strike is a form of coercion. But even in America
with our tradition of violence--the violence of Indian wars, of the
frontier, of lynchings, of the underworld rackets, and of the third
degree habitually used by the police--the strike deserves to be
classified as a comparatively non-violent form of coercion, which on the
whole has won more victories for justice, at less cost of human
bloodshed, than the patriotic wars which clutter up the pages of
history."

A Forecast
----------

The forecast for the year 1935 is not a very cheerful one. Kiplinger
Service declares: 'For 1935 as a whole, government technical advisers
are figuring on business only slightly better than in 1934 as a whole."

Strikes, according to Nations Business, official organ of the Chamber of
Commerce of the United States, "will continue a serious drag on business
for the next year." This organ of the capitalists admits that "strikes
are the most effective weapons of labor in the fight for unionization."

Pearl L. Bergoff, head of the Bergoff Detective Agency of New York City,
who sent out thousands of men to "protect the mills" during the textile
strike--in other words to act as strong arm men and deputy sheriffs
(hired by the employers), is reported to have said:

"There'll be more strikers in 1935 than ever in history, and it don't
make me mad."
