% Days With an End
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1934, 3-4.

*Summary: Repeats P. Maurin's fear that increased state regulation leads
to fascism and undermines personal responsibility. However, agrees with
Pius XI in his encyclical "Forty Years After", that the state may
intervene when a particular group is threatened and no other means are
available to them. (DDLW \#13).*

To paraphrase on the title of Eugene O'Neill's play, our days are with
an end -- very much so. And it is to explain this our end in view that I
am writing this editorial.

People come to the workers' school and talk and hear much talk about the
encyclical, Forty Years After -- about the NRA and how far it goes to
approach the Pope's idea, about international peace and international
associations of working men and industrialists.

And then when they have heard all this from the lips of priest,
professor and laymen, Peter Maurin rises up with the voice of one crying
in the wilderness and says,

"The great danger of the present day is Fascism and the tendency of all
organization is to lead to fascism."

"What about the Pope and Quadragesimo Anno?" our listeners proclaim. And
Peter continues his warning,

"Fascism! Beware of state regulation because it leads to Fascism."

Whether it is the state regulation of the NRA or the state regulation of
the socialists, or the state regulation recommended by Pope Pius XI, his
warning is the same,

"Beware of Fascism."

Peter's hour at the school is from seven to eight; the speakers take the
floor at eight, and the listeners enter into discussion with the speaker
from nine to ten or ten-thirty or eleven. (Often it is hard to get them
home.)

But for the benefit of those who linger over their suppers, I am
rehashing Peter's preachings thus:

In view of the general disorder and chaotic condition of affairs, Pope
Pius issued his great encyclical on Saint Francis of Assisi. It was a
clarion call to action, Catholic action. It was vital -- of tremendous
importance for the righting of the world's ills. It was the message of
Christ's vicar on earth -- the message that Christ himself gave in the
Sermon On the Mount.

Time passed and the condition continued. In fact matters go from bad to
worst so that a world wide catastrophe threatens.

The result was the encyclical Forty Years After, recalling Pope Leo
XIII's encyclical on the Condition of Labor which was also disregarded
for forty years.

Peter's message is that Forty Years After does not hold up *the ideal* of
personal responsibility voiced by the encyclical on St. Francis of
Assisi. It is as though a sad and weary father said to his children who
warred continually on one another:

"Very well -- you will not follow the ideal for the sake of Christ. I
will present to you then still another program of action -- organization
-- the organization of some so that others may be coerced thereby. You
will not voluntarily reform, so pressure must be brought to bear."

But - the organization held up as best by Pope Pius XI, is not the
organization of the labor union as we know I here in America. It is the
organization of *Catholic* workingmen, to work for Catholic and
non-Catholic alike. Complete and widespread organization. Michael Gunn's
ideal of the Labor Guild approaches more nearly to this than the NRA.
But Mike Gunn is also a voice of one crying in the wilderness.

One of the professors who lectured us was pointing out how Utopias would
never work. But always it is the ideal of a Utopia held up that has
influenced the masses.

There is always a great need of idealists who hold up the ideal rather
than the practical. Without them men would not strive so high. Little by
little, it can be found that the ideal works and is practical and then
people are surprised.

The perfect state -- it is a thing to fight for.

Christ said, "Be ye therefore perfect even as your Father in Heaven is
perfect." "Go ye therefore and sell what you have and give to the poor."
"If you have two coats take one and give it to your brother, and if your
brother ask you for your coat, give him your cloak too."

People do not scoff at these words because they are the words of Christ.
A great many regard them hopelessly and falling back on their poor
humanity they admit their inability to live up to these words. But
nevertheless these words (hard words) go down through the ages, and
through them many have followed the precept as well as the counsel. And
have influenced humanity greatly thereby. (As for those who don't -- God
knows that we are but dust and he is a kind and tender father.)

The Catholic Worker stands opposed to Communism, Socialism, and Fascism.
*The Catholic Worker* regards the existing system of labor unions as a
poor and faulty one, far below that of organization described by Pope
Pius XI in his Encyclical, Forty Years After. *The Catholic Worker*
fears the NRA inasmuch as it may lead to more state regulation and bring
nearer the danger of Fascism. *The Catholic Worker* is not "standing
for" the Cooperative Commonwealth Federation in Canada for that very
reason. More state regulation, to an even greater degree than that of
the NRA.

We admit the danger of these palliatives to the existing disorder but we
see their danger from a different standpoint than do many others who
oppose them as being the offshoots of Moscow thought.

We believe with the Pope that whenever the general interest of any
particular class suffers and is threatened with evils *which can in no
other way be met*, the public authority, the state, must step in to meet
themâ€¦."If within the walls of a household there occur grave disturbances
of mutual rights, the public power must interfere." But not the italics
- "which can in no other way be met."

Peter Maurin believes that the Pope is opposed to political action, that
he welcomed the dissolution of the Catholic party in Italy and the
Centrist party in Germany. "Organizations of Catholic Workingmen" is
another thing entirely.

So -- though we say that Michael Gunn more nearly approaches in his idea
the teachings of the Pope than does the NRA -- we continue to cling to
the *ideal* as held up in the gospel and in the encyclical on St. Francis
of Assisi.

We shall not reach it we know. But that does not mean that there is no
use trying.
