% Works of Mercy Oppose Violence in Labor's War
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1941, 1,4.

*Summary: Involves the C.W. in strikes in order to spread Catholic
social teaching and promote better living conditions. Combats the charge
that the C.W. is communist and encourages spiritual weapons to fight
communism. (DDLW \#147).*

Four men were killed in Harlan County, Kentucky, today. They are coal
miners and by next week, I suppose, their deaths will be forgotten by
the newspaper public. There are a great many coal miners killed every
year and no matter how many times the numbers are printed in order to
form public opinion, in order to enforce Congressional action on an
inspection law, the number is forgotten, the law tabled, and violations
go on. There are so many people being killed all over the world by
aerial bombardment, by fire and flood and famine and pestilence, that
only four down in Harlan County, Kentucky, doesn't make much difference.

Fathers, brothers or husbands, removed suddenly and violently from a
sunny April day! And it had been such a cold ugly March, with its
blizzards and icy roads and people confined to house and fireside. The
houses of the miners are cheerless houses. Now the sun is shining, but
four men released from winter see it no longer. We ask our Catholic
readers to write down on a prayer card in their missals (together with
the ten dead at the Memorial Day massacre, 1937), "Four men dead in
Harlan County," bloody Harlan County. God grant them refreshment, light
and peace. Light, yes, brighter than the brightness of these April days,
and peace from this sad class war.

And Other Strikes
===

And more violence in Milwaukee where an armored car at the Allis
Chalmers plant fired tear gas in a pitched battle with auto strikers who
have been out since February. In Chicago and down in Indiana there was
more violence with police beating pickets with three-foot riot clubs and
baseball bats. Today Henry Ford's plant at River Rouge went out with
representatives from many other auto locals of the union helping on the
picket line, in the hastily set up soup kitchens and relief stations.

Barricades were made in the streets to keep workers from getting to the
plants and service men from within the Ford plant came out into the
streets for several pitched battles with the strikers today. This strike
was precipitated by Ford's firing of the the representatives of the
union in different shops throughout the plant.

This is the first strike at the Ford River Rouge plant. A telegram came
in from our Detroit house asking me to come out, as I had rashly
promised that when Ford went on strike, I would be out to visit them.
But I am tired with a month of week-end trips and much speaking, and
tired too with our last week at Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.

You scarcely see the mills from the auto road, but you can see the smoke
and at night the red glow in the sky from across the Lehigh river.

To get to the workers' side of the town, you cross a bridge and the one
we took was wooden. A car pays a five cent toll and a pedestrian a penny
toll. There are thirteen gates at this Bethlehem plant which employs
21,000 men. During the last three days of the strike The Catholic Worker
station wagon, manned by Joe Zarrella and Dwight Larrowe, served the
pickets at these gates with coffee and soup and sandwiches.

There were several reasons why we were there, in addition to our
interest in the struggles of the workers all over the country for better
conditions and our wishing to reach them with Catholic social teaching
at a time of crisis.

One was that these were our next door neighbors, and this was the first
conflict of its kind at the plant. We were anxious to see the workers in
this corporation organized so that they could express *themselves*
corporately, so that they could better their conditions and begin to
recognize that they were creatures of body and soul, temples of the Holy
Ghost, so that they could begin to get a sense of their own dignity as
men.

Twenty-Year Service
===

In my visit to Harrisburg the day before I had come upon a victim of
Bethlehem greed. Old Patrick Kenny, a worker for Bethlehem for twenty
years, was tossed on the ash heap--literally, he was put away in the
almshouse, and had it not been for the work of Mary Frecon, who is the
head of Catholic Worker activities in Harrisburg, he would be still
moldering there in confinement. As it is, he is now living with his aged
sister, in a little house, and both of them enjoying their old age
pension.

No Communists
===

Of course speakers and writers, over the radio and in the public press,
try to discredit the strikers by talking of Communist influence and
propaganda and sabotage. But I doubt if even a Dies agent could have
found a Communist in the Bethlehem strike. A sad commentary on the
ignorance of Catholics as to the social teachings of the Church was
evidenced in the charge against us, the three Catholic Workers helping
in the soup kitchen and distributing papers, that we were Communist.
"Why else," they said, "would they be coming down from New York to help
us?"

Nor Are We
===

Howard Curtis, sub regional director of the SWOC (Steel Workers
Organizing Committee), reported to me that one of the young Catholics
who had signed up with the union had accused us of being Communist and
had destroyed some of our papers which were left in the union hall. The
very fact that we helped in the formation of a ladies committee to help
the SWOC was taken as an indication of our radical tendencies. This in
spite of the fact that we are members of the Catholic Press Association
and that we have printed from time to time recommendations of the
Bishops for our work. During the 1936 organizing drive Bishop Boyle of
Pittsburgh gave me permission to visit every parish in his diocese to
further the education of the steel workers along the lines of
organization, through The Catholic Worker.

Hysteria Grows
===

But hysteria is mounting in this country, and fear, anger, contention
and lack of brotherly love are a result of the publication of best
sellers such as Jan Valtin's "Out of the Night." "Sabotage, destruction,
communist propaganda," are the charges made on every side. The latest
article by Jan Valtin in the American Mercury helps the hysteria mount.
One can trace such killings as those in Harlan today, to these
incitements.

Remove the Cause!
===

We are not denying that Communism exists, that Communists are members of
the unions, that a few of the unions are controlled by Communists. But
no one can make that charge against the steel workers, a church-going,
peaceable folk, hard-working family men.

And even where Communism does exist, are terrorist tactics the way to
combat it? Will Christians never learn to use their spiritual weapons
instead of the weapons of their enemy which they use ineffectively and
half heartedly?

General Strike
===

As to Communists working towards a general strike--that has been the
dream of radicals, and the bugbear of the public for generations. Jack
London once wrote a pamphlet on the general strike, predicting the
entire changing of the social order, through a peaceable general strike,
peaceable because the workers were so well organized, so well
disciplined and so well prepared.

We say frankly, that we wish indeed the workers would lay down their
tools and refuse to make the instruments of death. We wish that they
were so convinced of the immorality of modern wars that they would
refuse to make the instruments of those wars.

Saboteurs?
===

Here is a story they tell of John Ramsay, secretary treasurer of the
SWOC in Bethlehem. He used to work in the rolling mill where they were
turning out steel for submarines. Some of his employers told him to mark
some steel "Grade A," which should be marked "Grade B." He refused to do
it. It would have meant endangering of the lives of men in the
submarines if "Grade B" steel had been used instead of the "Grade A"
which could withstand the terrific under water pressure.

There is his testimony before the NLRB. The corporation lawyers asked
him if he was afraid of Bethlehem Steel. He said no. They asked him if
he was terrorized or intimidated by Bethlehem Steel. He replied again,
no. They asked him if he was different from other men and he replied
that inasmuch as he and his wife and four children depended upon God
rather than on the Steel Corporation pay envelope for their sustenance,
he guessed he was.

Men Who Pray
===

There are other men who pray in the union field. Phil Murray prays and
I've heard men tell of seeing him at it in time of stress. There are
forty-five million workers in this country, workers in steel, in
textiles, in autos, in farm equipment, in coal, on ships, on
waterfronts, on truck routes and on farms. These men, inarticulate men
for the most part, because they are used to using their hands rather
than their tongues, have all too few leaders and all too many critics.
Christ was a worker, born by choice into their class, used to hardship
and poverty. Because His feet walked where theirs have trod, because His
hands also were broadened and soiled by tools and sweat, because we want
to be close to Him, as close to Him in this life as we can possibly get,
because through love of Him we love our brothers, we were at Bethlehem
(so strangely named) this past week.
