% Articles on Distributism - 2
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1948, 1,2, 6.

*Summary: Argues that distributism is the only alternative to the US
economy. Distributism is an alternative to capitalism and socialism
built around "the village economy" and a more just distribution of
wealth. Quotes four modern Popes in its support. Summarizes its
principles with the following Statements: "land is the most natural form
of property" "wages should enable man to purchase land" "the family is
the most perfect when rooted in its own holdings" "agriculture is the
first and most important of all arts." (See also DOC \#159 and DOC
\#161) (DDLW \#160).*

We have a farm at Newburgh of nearly six acres. We are raising hay,
corn, vegetables, pigs, chickens, a cow. Every few days the dog, King,
has brought in woodchucks and some of them weigh eight pounds. He must
have caught fifty this year. Down at the docks the Negroes fish without
a license for eels. It is woodchuck season and you can eat the
woodchucks now. You skin them as you do rabbits, and roasted with sage
dressing they make a good meal, and they are cleaner than chicken or
hog. Right now Carmela and Florence are sitting out under the crabapple
tree stringing beans. There are peas and broccoli and swiss chard
besides lettuce for salads. It is getting easier to feed the forty or so
retreatants who come every few weeks to the farm and the twenty who are
here all summer.

I tell these things to make the mouth water. In the fall we are going to
put in a field of wheat and next summer, God willing, we will have our
own flour for the good whole wheat loaves that come out of the oven
every day.

For the average worker it is more and more difficult to get food.
Butter, oleo and fat are sky high. Meat costs a fortune. Food prices
have gone up 133% and milk 85%. We saw these figures in a magazine
recently to advertise milk as a food. How to live, how to feed a family!
Most of all, how to find shelter!

\*\*\*
---

Every month I shall have to explain the title to this series. We are not
expecting utopia here on this earth. But God meant things to be much
easier than we have made them. A man has a natural right to food,
clothing, and shelter. A certain amount of goods is necessary to lead a
good life. A family needs work as well as bread. Properly is proper to
man. We must keep repeating these things. Eternal life begins now. "All
the way to heaven is heaven, because He said, 'I am the Way.'" The Cross
is there of course, but "in the cross is joy of spirit." And love makes
all things easy. If we are putting off the old man and putting on
Christ, then we are walking in love, and love is what we all want. But
it is hard to love, from the human standpoint and from the divine
standpoint, in a two room apartment. We are eminently practical,
realistic.

\*\*\*
---

Irene has charge of the clothes at Mott street (besides having charge of
the women's house and writing for the paper, and seeing visitors) and
the other day a mother of eleven children, nine of them living, came in
to get clothes. They are all living at the Municipal lodging house on
Third street. The other afternoon when the rain had stopped Irene and I
walked down Mott street to Bleecker where Mott street ends, then over to
the Bowery and up one block to third, and there, just to the east of the
Bowery, is the big building that used to be the Bowery Y.M.C.A. and
which is now a municipal shelter.

I was familiar with the place because it used to have a "clean up
system" before the blessed days of D.D.T. which you can use like a
talcum powder, and there once in a while I used to bring my old friend
Mr. Breen. He was a very dignified old man, with a beautiful beard and
he walked with a cane. He looked like Chief Justice Hughes. He had
worked as Sunday editor of the Washington Post, and he had worked for
the N.Y. World, written reviews for the Commonweal, poetry for us, and
had assisted us, during his last years, in answering our large
correspondence. His wife and children had died, he had fallen into bad
times and during the depression we became his family. For a time he had
slept in the world's largest bedroom, on a dock down at South Ferry,
where the Municipality put up about 1,200 men every night. He used to
tell us a story of one old man who evidently thought he was in a
cathedral, so vast was the long dim dock at night, and in his night
shirt, with his long sticks of legs making him look like a strange bird,
he used to "make the stations" down the inner aisle between the
double-decker beds, pausing at every seventh bed to pray.

Mr. Breen had many such stories of the poor. We had to take him, as I
said before, to the Bowery Y, for a clean-up every now and then. One
could bathe at leisure, have one's clothes cleaned and pressed, and have
a shave and a hair cut all for seventy-five cents. We used to go in
state in a taxi cab. It was very hard to get Mr. Breen to go, and he
would only go with me. As we went up to the desk and the very courteous
young man behind it, Mr. Breen would look at him haughtily and say in
lordly fashion, "I have come to be deloused." Then he would turn to me
with a sweeping bow, thank me for my escort, and I would leave him there
for the night.

Now this building is part of the municipal lodging house. On either side
of the entrance hall there are beautiful rural scenes painted on the
walls, a road through the woods, a country field, and around the tiled
halls, children play, from one-year old and up, slipping in and out
between the hordes of young and old, black and white, drunk and sober
men who are also served, who also are "clients" getting their lodging
for the night and several meals a day. The men were registering at the
desk as we came in. They all could write their names on the ledger, they
were all literate. After they registered they were all taken upstairs to
the dormitories to bed. It was five-thirty. No one was taken in after
nine.

Downstairs meals were still being served. They had soup or stew, as we
could see from the windows outside, two slices of bread and huge mugs of
cocoa.

I don't know how many thousands of men are served every day, are lodged
every day. What was occupying our minds was the fact that forty-five
families were lodged there too, with six, eight, nine children. The
mothers sat around, the fathers came in to report the result of their
day's search for rooms, (and who wants families of four children even,
let alone nine?) The children restlessly ran from end to end of the
hall, and we tried to talk.

"Isn't there a play room?" Yes, but the colored, the Puerto Rican the
Italian and the "American' children fought. It was nerve-racking. There
were separate bed rooms for different members of the family, it was not
overcrowded, there is a doctor for the women and children. The city was
doing what it could. Up at 26th street, another branch of the Municipal
lodging house, there were other families and more men. What they were
trying to do was bring all the men down here to Third street, and get
the women and children away from the Bowery and up to 26th where there
was a playground, a dead end street, the river, and more light and air.

\*\*\*
---

Yesterday two Irish Christian brothers came to call and told us of
Harlem where their order had a school in what was the largest parish in
the world. There were thirty thousand people in it, it was estimated.
Families fleeing the hunger of Porto Rico were living three families to
an apartment. It was the most congested, most neglected section of the
city. With all these thousands, the church on Sunday was only half full.
It is not a leakage from the Church, it is a landslide.

We have been working on these problems at the Catholic Worker for the
past fifteen years, and we can say with all sincerity, that things have
never been so bad as they are now, even in the worst of depression. Now
men may have work, but they lack homes. There may be odd jobs,
poorly-paid jobs, something coming in the way of work, but the housing
situation gets worse and worse. Everywhere it is the same. In every city
and town the story is the same. There are no apartments, there are no
houses.

Mr. O'Daniel, father of the eleven we were visiting, had had a job as
janitor. In order to make their profits and avoid the penalties of rent
gouging, the owners of the building he was in had transformed a
twelve-apartment house into a twenty-four-apartment house of two and a
half rooms each. The board of health got after the owner for having a
large family of children in the basement, and he had let them go. No one
wants to employ families, none want to rent to families.

And of course we can understand the home owners' point of view. Once we
saw a cartoon in the Saturday Evening Post of a mother rebuking her
child. "Don't deface the wall, William, we own this house." In other
words, what you own is taken care of. Property means responsibility.
Property is proper to man.

This is a long preamble. But what a need there is to arouse the
conscience! To call attention to the poor! "Are there any more poor?"
This fatuous question has been asked me so often by well meaning
listeners at meetings that one must answer it. "What about the
bricklayer and his huge wages? Never have wages been so high." And what
do high wages mean when there is no just price? Anyway, with all the
talk of high wages, most of the people around here that I know are
working for thirty and thirty five dollars a week. Also the great white
collar class of young men and young women are getting along by living at
home, profiting by the industry and thrift and better housing
opportunity of their parents.

People sooner or later will have to admit that things are rapidly
getting worse, not better. People said during the war that Hitler had
the theory that the bigger the lie, the easier it was to get people to
believe it. It seems to me we have quite a number of these big lies.

There is the lie of high wages.

There is the lie of widespread ownership.

There is the plentiful production lie.

There is the everyone consuming more lie.

In the little pamphlet DISTRIBUTISM by S. Sagar, a reprint of six
articles from the Weekly Review of London, says that the great danger of
today is not a revolt of the proletariat but the lethargy of the
proletariat. He also says that the "preliminary to any step taken
towards Distributism was the creation of the will to take them."

Here is one quotation from Pope Pius XII which ought to be considered a
mandate along these lines.

"We confirm what only recently we had occasion to expound. For
Catholics, the only path to be followed in solving the social problem is
clearly outlined in the doctrine of the Church. The blessing of God will
descend on your work if you do not swerve in the slightest degree from
this path. You have no need to think up specious solutions or to work
with facile and empty formulas for results that prove only a delusion.
What you can and ought to strive for **is a more just distribution of
wealth**. This is and this remains a central point in Catholic social
doctrine.

Joseph T. Nolan writes in Orate Fratres: Too long has idle talk made out
of Distributism as something medieval and myopic, as if four modern
popes were somehow talking nonsense when they said: the law should favor
widespread ownership (Leo XIII); land is the most natural form of
property (Leo XIII and Pius XII); wages should enable a man to purchase
land (Leo XIII and Pius XI); the family is most perfect when rooted in
its own holding (Pius XII); agriculture is the first and most important
of all the arts (Pius VII); and the tiller of the soil still represents
the natural order of things willed by God (Pius XII).

"But in general there is so little facing of the problem of the land, or
of machinery, which the Franciscan Belliot called "one of the gravest
and most disquieting elements in the social problem." How many
Catholics, especially liturgists, share the anxiety of the present pope
at "the agglomeration of huge populations in the cities and the
diminution of modern man by the domination of the machine? Neither the
nihilists nor the optimists who still dream of abundant production can
fill our present need; a lot closer are the realists who are willing to
rebuild an organic Christian society from the ground up, from the soil,
who might escape the very real prospects of unemployment, hunger and
despair."

There are numerous steps that can be taken, outlined in THE RESTORATION
OF PROPERTY by Hilaire Belloc. But how to create in men a desire to take
them, a hope that they will be able to take them?

Things have gotten so desperate, Mr. Sagar says, goods have gotten so
scarce, the effort to find housing has become so heart breaking, that
now at last today, after these many years, DISTRIBUTISM IS GOING TO BE
DISCUSSED.

The alternatives are not capitalism or socialism. Nor are they the
corporatism that Fr. Massey seems to be indicating in AMERICA. We must
take into consideration the nature of man and his needs, not just
cash--commodities, food and clothing, but a home, a bit of land, and the
tools with which to work, part ownership in workshops and stores and
factories.

*Distributism does not mean that everyone must be a farmer.*The
Distributist thinks in terms of the village economy, and as for the size
of the CITY (the city of God) which Cardinal Suhard talks of our
building, that is a matter of situation. It may be five hundred, it may
be five thousand, it may be fifty thousand. The main thing to do is to
distribute the cities before the atom bomb does it. We are not
suggesting that it be done by force but by education. If that seems too
slow a method, probably depression, war, hunger and homelessness will
play their part. We only know it is not human to live in a city of ten
million. It is not only not human, it is not possible. "Cities are the
occasion of sin," Fr, Vincent McNabb said, and of course any theologian
will say that we should flee the occasions of sin. Pope Pius XII pointed
out that it was difficult for modern youth to live in the cities without
heroic virtue. (And it was never intended that the good life should
demand heroic virtue.)

Distributism does not mean that we throw out the machine. The machine,
Peter Maurin used to say, should be the extension of the hand of man. If
we could do away with the assembly line, the slavery of the machine, and
the useless and harmful and destructive machines, we would be doing
well.

In the psalms it says, "Lord, make me desire to walk in the way of thy
commandments." Daniel was called a man of desires, and because he was a
man of desires, the Lord heard him.

But how, are we going to get people to desire, and to hope, when men
like Fr. Becker writing in America; Fr. Higgins, of the N.C.W.C. and Fr.
FitzSimmons of Notre Dame, accept the status quo, endorse social
security instead of pointing to the enormous dangers that go with it and
in effect combat the desire of the people for land and for bread, and
feed them on husks that the acceptance of the city and the factory
result in.

Cardinal Suhard of Paris and Fr. De Lubac, S.J., both cry out against
the refusal of some traditionalists to be co-creators with God and use
the tools which science has put in man's hands. But Fr. De Lubac also
writes (in the Dublin Review) "Does not the discovery of new values
involve the depreciation of other, perhaps more fundamental ones? And
does it not breed, even while the discovery is still modest and
tentative, a kind of intoxication, so that the passionate interest it
arouses tends to make men oblivious of everything else, even of
essentials? And so ambiguous situations pile up, leading inevitably to
crises whose outcome no one can safely prophecy."

We are sure that these priests aforementioned have the interests of the
worker at heart, and that in their social ideas and studies they are
trying to remedy situations which have become well nigh intolerable. But
the essentials are food, clothing and shelter. The essential is
ownership which brings with it responsibility, and what is more
essential than the earth on which we all spring, and from which comes
our food, our clothes, our furniture, our homes.

It is as a woman, a mother, speaking for the family and the home, that I
protest the work of "priest-sociologists," who in their desire to help
the worker, are going along with him in his errors, and are accepting
the easy way of capitalist industrialism which leads to collectivism and
the totalitarian state.

To conclude this particular installment of our series of articles on
Distributism, the warning is there, Isaiah 26, 5.

"He shall bring down them that dwell on high; the high city he shall lay
low. He shall bring it down even unto the ground; he shall pull it down
even to the dust. The foot shall tread it down; the feet of the poor,
the steps of the needy. "

So, "strengthen ye the feeble hands, and confirm the weak knees. Say to
the faint hearted, take courage and fear not. Behold, your God will
bring the bread of recompense. God Himself will come and save YOU,"
