% Beyond Politics
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1949, 1,2,4.

*Summary: Discusses the C.W.'s means to achieve a better social
condition in comparison to communist means. Exhorts "the rich to become
poor and the poor to become holy." Criticizes capitalism's unbalanced
distribution of wealth and admits a certain compatability exists between
Marx and Christianity. (DDLW \#166).*

Women think with their whole bodies and they see things as a whole more
than men do.

Maybe I am saying this to justify myself for my protesting this last
month the refusal of bail to the eleven Communists, a protest which was
published in the *Daily Worker*, the *American Guardian* and other
papers, much to the horror of many of our Catholic fellow workers.

It is necessary to explain if we do not wish to affront people. We
sincerely want to make people understand our point of view.

First of all, let it be remembered that I speak as an ex-Communist and
one who has not testified before Congressional Committees, nor written
works on the Communist conspiracy. I can say with warmth that I loved
the people I worked with and learned much from them. They helped me to
find God in His poor, in His abandoned ones, as I had not found Him in
Christian churches.

Salvation Is of the Poor
------------------------

I firmly believe that our salvation depends on the poor. "Inasmuch as
you have not feed the hungry, clothed the naked, sheltered the homeless,
visited the prisoner, protested against injustice, comforted the
afflicted, etc., you have not done it to Me." Christ identifies Himself
with the poor. TheChurch throughout the ages in all its charities, in
the person of all its saints, who lived the lives of poverty with the
poor, did these things. But since these works were for centuries
confined to priests, brothers and nuns, the great mass of Christians did
not participate these last few centuries except in a most indirect
manner. Pius XI called everyone to do these things when he called for
Catholic Action. The great tragedy of the century is that the workers
are lost to the Church, he said. All this has been repeated many times.

Our Positions
-------------

But I must speak from my own experience. My radical associates were the
ones who were in the forefront of the struggle for a better social order
where there would not be so many poor. What if we do not agree with the
means taken to achieve this goal, nor with their fundamental philosophy?
We do believe in, "from each according to is ability, to each according
to his need." We believe in the "withering away of the State." We
believe in the communal aspect of property as stressed by the early
Christians, religious orders, the communes of Switzerland and Spain, and
in a society of federated associations, cooperating in about the same
way as postal companies, railroads, Red Cross, cooperate now, without
the aid of the state, and without the interference of hostile states. We
believe in the constructive activity of the people, "the masses'" and
the mutual relations which existed during the mediaeval times and were
worked out from below. We believe in loving our brothers regardless of
race, color or creed and we believe in showing this love by working for
better conditions immediately and the ultimate owning by the workers of
their means of production. We believe in an economy based on human needs
rather than on the profit motive.

Certainly we disagree with the Communist Party, as we disagree with
other political parties who are trying to maintain the American way of
life. We don't think it's worth maintaining. We and the Communists have
a common idea that something else is necessary, some other vision of
society must be held up to be worked for. Certainly we disagree over and
over again with the means chosen to reach their ends, because as Fr.
Baker has said, and Robert Ludlow repeated many a time, the means become
the end.

No Conspiracy Proved
--------------------

Up to now the Communist Party has been a legal party and has maintained
workers' schools, social centers, publications, strike headquarters,
relief setups, etc. As for their conspiracy to overthrow the government
by force and violence, I do not think that the state has proved its
case. I have not read any of the literature that the defense is putting
out in asking for bail and appealing their case, but I do know that the
general argument runs like this:

They believe, of course, that violence will come. (So do we when it
comes down to it, and we are praying it won't.) They believe that it
will be forced upon the workers by the class struggle which is going on
all around us now.

Berdyaev pointed this out in his book, Christianity and Class War, and
Supreme Court Justice Murphy (who was not too consistent a Third Order
Franciscan) also pointed this out in one of his decisions. Class war is
a fact and one does not need to advocate it. The Communists point to it
as forced upon them, and say that when it comes they will take part in
it, and in their plans they want to prepare the ground, and win as many
as possible to their point of view and for their side. And where will we
be on that day?

If we spend the rest of our lives in slums, as I hope we will who work
for and read the CATHOLIC WORKER, if we are truly living with the poor,
working side by side with the poor, helping the poor, we will inevitably
be forced to be on their side, physically speaking. But when it comes to
activity, we will be pacifists, I hope and pray, non-violent resisters
of aggression, from whomever it comes, resisters to repression,
coercion, from whatever side it comes, and our activity will be the
works of mercy. Our arms will be the love of God and our brother.

The Rending of War
------------------

And as for our great masses of Catholic people, they will be dragged in,
poor though they be, or workers though they be, to use the same means of
force and violence, to hate their enemy, to defend the status quo,
because there will be no time for fine distinctions then and the
Catholic will not be able to apologize for his siding with the duPonts,
the Morgans, the Girdlers, war profiteers, the cynical politicians, the
literary people, the intellectuals who will use fine and exalted phrases
to inspire and integrate the body and soul of the worker in one passion
-the desire for sweat, blood and tears, for suffering, and they will use
these mysterious cravings of the human heart and once again betray the
workers into war. War, the rending of the Mystical Body of Christ, as
St. Cyprian called it.

Final Aims
----------

But the Communists, "the eleven," the Communist leaders in the expelled
CIO unions, they are not honest, everyone says. They do not want
improved conditions for the workers. They want the end, the final
conflict, to bring on the world revolution.

Well, when it comes down to it, do we of the CATHOLIC WORKER stand only
for just wages, shorter hours, increase of power for the workers, a
collaboration of employer and worker in prosperity for all? No, we want
to make "the rich poor and the poor holy," and that too is a revolution
obnoxious to the pagan man. We don't want luxury. We want land, bread,
work, children, and the joys of community in play and work and worship.
We don't believe in those industrial councils where the heads of United
States Steel sit down with the common man in an obscene **agape** of
luxury, shared profits, blood money from a thousand battles all over the
world. No, the common good, the community, the commune must be
considered. Some day engineers, scientists, managers, foremen, workers,
all interested workers, may sit down together, but never the Fairless'
with their \$50,000 pensions, who brought about the class war going on
right now.

During 1949, up to August, 412 miners were killed at work. And as for
crippling and disabling accidents, there were 14,871 during these same
months. The press and the pulpit with them excoriate John L. Lewis, who
is demanding a pension for the workers.

Struggle for power, the newspapers shout, and talk of Lewis and Murray
(neither of whom are ever confused with the Communists), as strangling
the country. It is a very unequal struggle still, as far as I can see,
from the evidence before me. If business has managed so well, if
everyone is being so well-paid, well-housed, well-fed, what is all the
shouting for?

Capitalism Judged
-----------------

In this issue we have **Osservatore Romano's** judgement of Capitalism.
We also have a story of the uprising of the peasants of Italy, where
Communists polled 40% of the vote in spite of shocking interference of
press and pulpit in politics. Every pastor in the U.S., in churches
which had Italian parishioners, seemed to be urging the people to write
to friends in Italy that they would get no help from the U.S. unless
they voted our way. Pastors from Italian churches went to Italy and all
kinds of opinion-making tactics were used by the public relations men of
the Capitalist order.

In view of the fact that Russia and official Communism controls so much
of Europe and Asia and is spreading, hysteria has been built up here
which is a terrible indication of our lack of confidence in our "own way
of life," our own integrity, our moral supremacy which Mr. Truman was
just talking about this morning. We have come to the point of using
repressive measures, such as the Communist trial and the expelling of
left-wing unions. Is the system with its expose of graft and corruption
)the facts are brought to light again and again but nothing is done
about it) worth saving? And will it be saved by such means?

What else have we, people say, seeing only the world around them, as we
have made it these last few swift-moving generations? If they took time
to think, if they had the zeal of the CP for school and study and
meeting and planning, and with it all the thirst for martyrdom; and if
Catholics delved into the rich body of Catholic liturgy and sociology
they would grow in faith and grace and change the world, bringing about
this change "within the shell of the old, with a philosophy so old it
looks like new," as Peter Maurin used to say.

But what has all this to do with signing protests, advocating bail for
convicted Communists?

I can only quote Claudel, "God writes straight with crooked lines."

I believe that we must reach our brother, never toning down our
fundamental oppositions, but meeting him when he asks to be met, with a
reason for the faith that is in us, as well as with a loving sympathy
for them as brothers. "We understand because we believe," as St. Anselm
says and how can they understand with a darkened reason, lacking this
faith which is our privilege to possess which would enlighten their
minds? Maritain says he is more certain of his faith than he is of his
own existence, since Primordial Truth has told him through the
intermediary of the Church which is itself an object of faith. St.
Thomas, he quotes as saying we are led to faith by the natural reason,
the testimony of the law and the prophets, and the preaching of the
Apostles and their successors. But if the Communists do not accept this
authority and if their reason is darkened, how can they reach the faith
which they must have in order to know and understand?

The bridge - it seems to me - is love and the compassion (the suffering
together) which goes with all love. Which means the folly of the Cross,
since Christ loved men even to that folly of failure.

St. Therese said her aim was to make God loved. And I am sure that we
pray to love God with an everlasting love (Pascal said we would not
search for Him if we had not already found Him) and yearn over our
fellows in desire that He should be loved. How can they hear unless we
take seriously our lay apostolate and answer them when they speak to us?
We believe that God made them and sustains them. It is easier sometimes
to see His handiwork here than in the Pecksniffs and Pharisees of our
capitalist industrial system. We must cry out against injustice or by
our silence consent to it, and if we do not cry out the very stones of
the street will, as Jesus has said.

And what about Fr. Duffy, people are asking. Just yesterday a reporter
from an information sheet run by ex-FBI men for business men, called up,
and every day or so there are other calls.

Here we have a priest in politics, not coming out in favor of bingo, but
concerning himself with peace and war, land and cooperatives, housing
and the condition of the poor. He is, in order to be heard, involving
himself on the Communist side in that Communists are in the Non-Partisan
League, the American Labor Party, the Irish Progressives, etc.

"I am speaking where they invite me, I am reaching the poor," he says
with a brogue that endears him to New York radicals and utterly confuses
the Catholics of New York and Boston. (He was mobbed on one occasion by
some pious zealots who tried to tear his collar off, the symbol to them
of his priesthood.) "I am trying to go where they never hear or see a
priest," he says. "I am trying to bring them the word of God."

No one can doubt his sincerity and goodness. Fr. Duffy, well known too
our readers, is a man without guile. What fault he has is a terrible
impatience which makes him a hard man to work with anywhere. He wants to
see results, which makes him impatient of the CATHOLIC WORKER.

He thinks he is practical when he outlines on paper a good social order
and then says with a child's wonderment, "Why don't they follow it?" In
the face of constant emergencies and tragedies of temperament, sickness
and disorder he says brusquely. "Go sit in Church. Read a chapter of the
Imitation. Only God can help you." And he suffers under his own
helplessness to change men, to change the social order. So he takes
refuge in writing and speaking to those no one else is reaching.
Whenever he speaks, he points out his differences. On leave from
Ireland, and having the courtesy of the diocese (to say Mass but not to
preach or engage in regular parish work) he has no salary, no funds, and
relying only on the dimes he gets for his pamphlets, he lives in a
three-room cold flat and lives on Trappist fare. Of course he is an
embarrassment to the diocese.

He is no St. Thomas, who was excommunicated at one time for drawing so
many truths from Aristotle, a pagan philosopher brought by Moslem
scholars from the East to the West.

He is no St. Alphonsus Liguori, who was also disciplined by the Church
(they were handing out plenty of excommunications in those days) and
finally kicked out of his own order. He is no Joan of Arc, who tried to
go to the people in her own day. But in his own way he is stirring up
thought on all sides. Others may come who will not reconcile Marxism to
Christianity, but the Marxist to the Christ. There is truth to be found
in Karl Marx as there was in Aristotle.

But the temper of the day is not peaceful. Only a few short years ago
our present enemies were our allies, the allies of this government, and
it was our C.O.s who were being arrested and confined for their beliefs,
for not fighting side by side with Russia. We realize our opponents and
I am sure Fr. Duffy does also. We are convinced once again, however,
that not the weapons of force, nor the weapon of the lie which is used
by both sides, will save us. Only Truth and Love. We must love seventy
times seven, from the heart, and talk of it seventy times seven.

And as for the folly of this procedure, and the seeming triumph in this
world of evil over good, Fr. De Lubac, the French Jesuit, writes:

"So long as we talk and argue and busy ourselves on the plane of this
world, evil seems the stronger. More than that, whether evil distresses
us or whether we exalt it, it alone seems real. The thing is to enter on
another plane, to find that fourth dimension which represents the
kingdom of the Spirit. Then Freedom is Queen, then God triumphs and man
with Him."
