% Distributism Versus Capitalism
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1954, 1,6.

*Summary: Criticizes those Catholics who affirmed the Industrial Council
Plan that supported co-management. Calls for co-ownership as the only
means to alleviate the injustice caused by industry and quotes
"Observatore Romano" on its condemnation of capitalism. Also criticizes
those who call the Industrial Council Plan the Pope's plan, and
repudiates the claim by quoting Pius XII's 1952 Christmas message which
calls for an agriculture economy. (DDLW \#175).*

David Hennessy was talking enthusiastically about the latest pamphlet he
had received from England, Aquinas Paper No. 22, Financial Justice, by
J.F.L. Bray, a Blackfriar's publication. He sat there with a child on
each knee, the baby crawling around the floor, sampling everything from
building block to discarded crust, learning according to her capacity.
Susie and Eric were building a tent in the corner, and Beckie was
reading quietly in the middle of the room, oblivious to the noise and
confusion around her. Sometimes we had to raise our voices above those
of the children to be heard. The dining room and the kitchen adjoin, and
there was a good fire in the kitchen stove, it being a cold rainy day in
the midst of the equinoctial storms of September. Tamar was trying to
cook supper, take care of one demand after another of the children, and
participate in the conversation.

"This is a good pamphlet to review in the light of that article you had
in the last issue of the Catholic Worker about the controversy between
the Council of Business and Professional Men of the Catholic Faith, and
Monsignor George G. Higgins, of the Social Action Department of the
National Catholic Welfare Council. Monsignor Higgins, together with Fr.
John F. Cronin, Sulpician and Fr. William J. Smith, Jesuit, Gerald
Schnepp, Society of Mary, and Ed Marciniak, editor of Work, not to speak
of John Cort, of the Commonweal and Association of Catholic Trade
Unionists are in favor of the Industrial Council plan, which stands for
co-management. The former group, which also has the backing of Fr.
Edward A. Keller, director of the Bureau of Economic Research of Notre
Dame, which has the backing also of Archbishops and Bishops, is all in
favor of no interference by labor in the management and are all for pure
and unadulterated capitalism.

"As a matter of fact, both sides are for capitalism. They believe that
it is here to stay. Monsignor Higgins says that the Industrial Council
Plan is here to stay. It isn't even here yet. It is just a plan to make
the best of our present capitalistic system, patching it up in other
words,--it is a design for the corporative state, not the corporative
order. Here is what **Osservatore Romano** has to say about capitalism:

"'Capitalism seizes, confiscates, and dries up wealth, i.e. reduces the
numbers of those who may enjoy riches, holds up distribution and defies
Divine Providence who has given good things for the use of all men. St.
Thomas Aquinas says that man must not consider riches as his own
property but as common good. This means that communism itself, as an
economic system, apart from its philosophy -- is not in contradiction
with the nature of Christianity as is capitalism.

"'Capitalism is intrinsically atheistic. Capitalism is godless, not by
nature of a philosophy which it does not profess, but in practice (which
is its only philosophy), by its insatiable greed and avarice, its mighty
power, its dominion.'"

Nickie left his father's lap and began to climb on top of the high chair
as though it were a diving tower and leaping off into the middle of the
room.

"The Industrial Council Plan is all for co-management, but Distributism
is for co-ownership," David went on. "The one is for working from the
top down, the other works from the bottom up. The trouble is, in
schools, colleges and seminaries, the Industrial Council Plan is always
talked of as the Papal Plan. The Pope has said that all ways should be
explored. His 1952 Christmas address has many things in it which are
pertinent to these problems."

Dumping Mary unceremoniously to the floor where she started to turn a
backward somersault, David seized some of his valuable Catholic
Documents which publish all the Pope's speeches, and found the one he
wanted to read. It was the 1952 Christmas message.

"Of course people can say that you are taking statements out of context,
but you can't ever quote without that risk. Look at this: 'It is
superstitious to expect salvation from rigid formulas mathematically
applied to the social order, for this attributes to them almost a
prodigious power which they cannot have; while to place one's hopes
exclusively in the creative forces of the activity of each individual,
is contrary to the designs of God, who is the Lord of order.

"'We wish to draw to the attention of those who step forward as
benefactors of mankind, to both these mistakes, but particularly to the
first; to the superstition which holds for certain that salvation must
come by organizing men and things in a strict unity directed towards
ever higher capacity to produce.

"'They think that if they succeed in co-ordinating the energies of men
and the resources of nature in a single organic structure for the
highest possible production, by means of a plan carefully made and
executed, then every kind of desirable benefit will spring forth:
prosperity, security for the individual, peace.

"One knows where to look in social thought for the technical concept of
society: it is in the gigantic enterprise of modern industryâ€¦what must
be denied is that modern social life should be regulated by them or made
to conform to them.

"It is above all a clear principle of wisdom that all progress is truly
such if it knows how to add new conquests to old, to link new benefits
with those acquired in the past: in a word if it knows how to make
capital of experience. Now, history teaches that other forms of national
economy have always had a positive influence upon all society, an
influence which benefited both the basic institutions of family, state,
private property, and those other institutions freely formed by men. We
may point by way of example, to the undeniable advantages which have
followed where an economy based chiefly on agriculture or the crafts has
been to the fore."

"In the face of all the present Pope has to say it is amazing to hear
the Industrial Council Plan always spoken of as the Pope's plan. We
should read all the statements that the Holy Father has made! The text
books used in Catholic schools and seminaries uphold industrial
capitalism and little attention is given to that body of thought among
American Catholics which sets its face against this godless system.
**The Social Justice Review**, published at St. Louis, has very good
material in it and so has **The Living Parish**, published by Monsignor
Hellriegel at Baden, St. Louis, although the latter is more liturgy than
sociology. It considers the life of the family however. Fr. Rembert
Sorg's book **Holy Work** has the essence of this teaching. **The Sun of
Justice** by Harold Robbins contains the best thinking ever done on
Distributism. And always, all the social writings of the present Pope.
Here is the theory of the Green Revolution, and all the little people,
all the families scattered in small towns and villages, all the people
in the toeholds on the land which we hear of from one end of the United
States to the other, should be reading these things and spreading these
ideas."

By this time Tamar had finished spooning some apple sauce into Margaret,
the baby, and David was hollering for supper. "Here I am," he said
ruefully, "spreading the seeds (Let's not call them germs) of the Green
Revolution through my booklists in The Catholic Worker every month, and
working in a smelter which is controlled by one of the largest
monopolies in the world and compelled to belong to what is considered a
communist-dominated union. Life is made up of fantastic, paradoxical
situations."

But who could think of life in that book-filled, child-filled room, with
the good smell of fresh homemade bread in the air with anything but
gratitude to God who gives us a rule of life and instruction, and gives
us, too, the joy of this strong conflict.
