% Housing
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1974, 1-2.

*Summary: Advocates the small is beautiful, personalist, house of
hospitality approach to the homeless, rather that the big impersonal
approach of the municipal lodging houses. (DDLW \#180).*

What did Holy Mother the City do in the Thirties--those grim days of the
Depression? Now we are having what broadcasters call a recession and
inflation combined, and people are homeless again and breadlines grow
longer and there are more of them. Sugar is exorbitant and rents of slum
apartments are a hundred dollars a month and more. When people are
evicted, landlords close down the apartments and then entire buildings
and wait for slum clearance and speculators and developers. People sleep
in doorways, empty buildings and, if they are lucky, get tickets for a
night's lodging or two in "flop houses."

As small children, we used to read Horatio Alger and the plight of
homeless newsboys. Dickens and Upton Sinclair later gave me pictures of
poverty in our American cities.

Housing the Homeless
--------------------

Â  My generation experienced the Depression and the work of public
authorities trying to handle it. The Roosevelts and their Work Projects:
Artists, Writers, Theatre projects, civilian conservation corp camps,
the latter showing great imagination and handling the problem of jobless
teen-agers.

But it is the city homeless I want to write about. Our back files are
not available to me as I write, as I am spending Thanksgiving Day on
Staten Island, so I will trust to my memory. I wrote a number of
articles in the paper about the municipal lodging houses, visiting them
over a period of years, and looking back I repent me of the harshness of
my judgment of the city's work. Now I realize how much was done in those
nonviolent days, before wars brutalized our population. Wars conducted
by those same benevolent authorities.

During those years, before W.W. II brought employment to all, we had not
only a succession of municipal lodging houses, all in mid and lower
Manhattan, but "the longest bedroom in the world,"--a pier at South
Ferry, where double-decker beds stretched down the long length over the
water, and the heat was piped in by the same system that heated those
skyscrapers which made N.Y. famous.

In addition to that, there was another pier stretching out into the East
River which, as I remember it, was like a bazaar with many booths
stretching the length of it. Here men could get a shave, a haircut, have
their clothes cleaned and pressed while they waited, and so on. These
were public facilities to take care of the homeless and unemployed.

One of the municipal lodging houses for women (we all called these
buildings the "Muni") was on West Fourteenth St. some old houses
adjoining, with all their basements forming a large dining room which
was so cozy and attractive that one of my old friends (unemployed)
confessed that she went there for her Thanksgiving and Christmas
dinners. It was better than the C.W., she said--you could be anonymous
and independent on those feastdays and just walk in. (Today, one of our
"Ladies" is going around sampling the dinners served by the Volunteers
of America and the Salvation Army. It is a beautiful, sunny, mild day of
holiday cheer.)

There was another Muni on East Fifth Street in the Fifties, which
occupied an entire school house, and there was space for a cafeteria as
well as dormitories and entire families were taken in.

Once when we were overcrowded at Mott Street, in the old rear tenement,
and we filled an additional apartment in front (we had all this space in
two unheated buildings with no baths and shared toilets with another
apartment on each floor), I visited the Chancery Office when Cardinal
McIntyre was a humble bishop and always available, and asked him why we
could not use also the rectory of St. Mary's Church on Grand St. for
additional quarters for the homeless. (With the Puerto Ricans increasing
in numbers on the East Side, it is now a big parish and the rectory is
used again.) The then Bishop McIntyre assured me we would have nothing
but headaches with this broadening of activities. The building
inspectors, health and fire inspectors would give us a rough time, he
assured us.

We are finding that to be true. Indeed, it started on Mott St. when one
of the women we housed and fed complained to the health department about
a meal she did not like and we were harassed by building inspectors for
some time over the equipment of our kitchen.

We are experiencing the same troubles now with our farm at Tivoli and
with Maryhouse, which is bought and paid for and being worked over now.

Small and Homelike
------------------

But we still look with longing at the emptying convents and Academies
and wish they could be transformed into hospices for the poor. But I can
realize from my own long experience all the difficulties of equipment
and personnel. If a floor were given over to hospitality there would
have to be far more than food, clothing and shelter supplied. There
would have to be loving hands to serve. As it is, nuns are leaving their
convents priests are leaving their rectories to go into the slums and
serve, and the emphasis is too often on just plain social work rather
than "preaching the good news to every creature."

In one of our crises in the late fifties, when we were ousted from our
wonderful old double house on Chrystie St. the women in the house (I
also) were given shelter at the Joan of Arc residence in midtown, west
side. I loved the atmosphere in that house (four bedroom dormitories
with a locker in which one could keep food, a chapel, daily Mass laundry
and kitchen in the basement). Why aren't there more of them for the
destitute?

And yet--and yet--we come back to the principle of "small is beautiful."
Up and down the West Coast there are now six houses of hospitality, a
house in Kansas City and in the quad-city area of Davenport, Iowa; a new
house in Chicago, with Karl Meyer one of the group! Visitors from the
Niagara house and the Schenectady house were with us at Tivoli this last
month. Stanley will be home soon to tell us all that is happening in
Milwaukee, Many houses around the country, small and homelike, are
better than the impersonality of city "muni's."

In New York some years ago, Fr. Wendell, O.P. had in his parish two
young women who had a 4-room apartment. The city used to call this type
of apartment a dumbbell apartment. That is, the two inner rooms were
smaller than the first room and the rear kitchen. The two inner rooms
were the bedrooms, and the sisters who rented this apartment had 2
double-decker beds, so that they could share with two others. We used to
send up young girls to them and they in turn sent us older women. Those
girls who received help never felt themselves to be recipients of
charity. They could have been school friends or relatives. The two
originators of this delicate charity are both married now with big
families. God has blessed them.

New York is big. Our house on First Street, five stories and basement,
seems big, and the new house for homeless women will try to keep to the
ideas of the personalist and communitarian revolution (emphasis on the
personalist). That emphasis and what Peter called his synthesis of Cult,
Culture and Cultivation are food for mind and spirit.

Our weekly Mass, our nightly Vespers our Friday night meetings and our
farms continue the work of Peter's synthesis. Let us keep to the Little
Way of Therese of Lisieux and say with E. F. Schumacher, an eminent
economist, a Rhodes scholar, who as a Catholic has Peter's sense of the
primacy of the spiritual, let us study his idea and repeat, "Small is
beautiful."
