% The Case of Cardinal McIntyre
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1964, 1, 6, 8.

*Summary: Elaborates on the Catholic Worker relationship with Church
authorities over many years and the "conflict of freedom and authority."
Reaffirms the laity's freedom of conscience and leadership role in
action against injustice. Reproaches "our shepherds" who fail to preach
voluntary poverty and "preach the gospel in season, out of season, and
that gospel is 'all men are brothers.'" (DDLW \#196).*

Of all hostilities one of the saddest is the war between clergy and
laity. We have written and spoken many times of all the aspects of war,
the beginnings in our own hearts, the hostilities in the family between
husband and wife, parents and children, children and parents. The entire
conflict of authority and freedom. **The Catholic Worker**, pacifist and
anarchist in philosophy, has had to discuss and write about all these
things, in particular, and in general.

The works of mercy are works of love. The works of war are works of the
devil,--"You do not know of what spirit you are," Jesus said to his
disciples when they would call down fire from heaven on the inhospitable
Samaritans. This is to look at things in the large context of modern
war. But as for the hostilities in our midst, the note of violence and
conflict in all our dealings with others,--everyone seems to contribute
to it. There is no room for righteous wrath today. In the entire
struggle over civil rights, the war which is going on in which one side
is nonviolent, suffering martyrdoms, every movement of wrath in the
heart over petty hostilities must be struggled with in order to hold up
the strength of the participants.

"Let us but raise the level of religion in our hearts, and it will rise
in the world," Newman wrote. "He who attempts to set up God's kingdom in
his heart, furthers it in the world." We cannot all go on Freedom Rides,
or take part in the COFO program in Mississippi, as young students are
doing. (Marie Asche, who worked with us last summer, has gone to
Mississippi.) But we can sustain them in our contributions, money,
prayers, and by works in our local area along these lines.

Seminarians
---

This is what seminarians and the Catholic Interracial group have been
doing in Los Angeles, not only this year but for many years, only to
meet with prohibitions of meetings, to setting up interracial councils,
and so on. This silence and non-cooperation on the part of the priest
and bishop and cardinal, this more than silence,--this censure, this
prohibition, has increased the separation of clergy and laity, and has
built up a wall of bitterness.

Last month a young priest in the Los Angeles diocese wrote a letter to
the Holy Father, asking for the removal of Cardinal McIntyre from the
work of the diocese. His letter was given to the press all over the
country and was reprinted by both secular and Catholic press.

Caine Mutiny
---

When I read the accounts in the dailies and some of the diocesan press,
I thought of **The Caine Mutiny**. When I read the book, I compared it
with the stories of the sea in Joseph Conrad's novels. The reasonable
interference of the sturdy mate in the more recent book brought him to
trial on the charge of mutiny. One of the things that struck me most
forcibly in the latter book was the difference between the worker mate
and the intellectual officer who needled him into making complaints and
then would not back him up, who urged him to save the ship and the crew
by disobeying orders, and then would not testify for him at the trial.

When a friend was criticizing one of the Cardinals as being backward and
restrictive of the freedom of the laity at that time, I was reminded of
the book I had just read and I asked him why he did not go to the
Chancery office and state his complaints, his remonstrances. The laity
have a freedom to express themselves that the clergy do not. The late
beloved Fr. LaFarge, S.J. said in one of his last books, that the
trouble with the church in America was a bullying clergy and a
subservient laity and when I quoted that statement in regard to an
incident which happened at the CW house of hospitality in Chicago, one
of our readers wrote in angrily holding us to be the author of the
statement of Fr. LaFarge.

Cardinals
---

I had not intended to write at length about this Los Angeles incident
since so many of the diocesan papers and weeklies gave it ample
coverage. But I recalled letters I had received in the last year, asking
my advice as to what to do, letters from the laity and from the
seminarians, east and west,--and when I recalled too my long
acquaintance with Cardinal McIntyre, (shall I say friendship?) I decided
I would write at length, and personally. What I say about him, I could
say also in one way or another about Cardinal Spellman and Cardinal
Cushing.

Another reason why it is good to write at length is that the problem has
to do with war, with race, with poverty, voluntary and involuntary, with
spiritual teaching, and our dissatisfaction with it. And what we can do
about all these things.

One of the newspapers in New York talked about the indignity which the
young priest was forced to submit to, the kneeling before his superior
and promising obedience. I do not know what the ceremony was, but I
imagine it is that one that occurs at every ordination, when the
candidate for the priesthood kneels and placing his two hands within the
hands of the bishop, swears obedience. One never hears a Catholic
objecting to this. We lay people kneel to receive absolution, to receive
a blessing, to receive all the sacraments, as coming from God, through
the priest. The non-Catholic does not realize what a relationship of
love and loyalty there is between the layman and the priest, the priest
and bishop. In all the great events of one's life, birth, marriage and
death, and for the unmarried the confirming of their vocation. For the
times of sin and sickness, there is absolution and anointing, and at the
moment of death, the holy oils and the prayers of priest and the people.
It is our Faith which lends strength and dignity to our paltry and
tragic lives. "In Thy hand are strength and power and to Thy hand it
belongs to make everything great and strong."

An Early Friend
---

I first met Cardinal McIntyre back in the late twenties when I was
filled with the longing to be a Catholic and could not because of
marriage difficulties. One goes to a priest in the chancery office to
straighten out these difficulties and Cardinal McIntyre who was then a
monsignor was the one assigned to me to take care of my inquiries. His
office was not a private one. His was one of a long row of desks on
either side of the room, far enough apart so that one could talk
privately. There was always a long line of people waiting in the outer
office, and one by one, we were ushered in. There was never any haste
about these interviews. He always gave me most courteous and sympathetic
attention and I remember times when I was there at noon and he had a
sandwich and a glass of milk brought to his desk. He said the Angelus
when the clock struck twelve. I remember thinking how hard these young
priests had to work, the tales they had to listen to. They had to be
lawyers, psychologists, priests, all in one. Between him and Father
Hyland, another young priest at Tottenville, Staten Island, I was helped
along the way, over a period of several years, and was baptized.

Priests and The Worker
---

When five years later I started **The Catholic Worker** at the
instigation of Peter Maurin, I did not ask permission,--I did not
discuss it with the chancery office. My contact with these young priests
made me realize the more what I had always felt,--that Catholics lived
in a world of their own, quite apart from the rest of the population.
They did represent the Irish, the Italians, the Poles, the Hungarians
and all the rest of the immigrant Catholic crowd who seemed so apart in
every way, not just by religion, from the rest of the white, Protestant
and generally middle class people from whom I sprang. I felt the order,
the discipline of their lives, even if it meant a twenty minute Mass on
a week day. In complete silence, and a three quarters of an hour of
worship on Sunday with news of bingo parties and coal collections
scattered in with announcements of requiem Masses and banns of marriage.

No Permission Asked
---

I had been writing articles for the **Sign**, for **America**, the
Jesuit paper, and doing clerical work for Fr. Joseph McSorley the
Paulist and when I spoke to them of my venture, all three editors,
Father Harold Purcell, Fr. Parsons, and Fr. McSorley all advised me to
launch out, but not to ask permission. But I understood why. How make
the hierarchy responsible for such an unproved venture? They might be
held responsible for debts to be contracted--perhaps that was also
understood to be part of the question.

At any rate the first issues of the paper came out and were greeted with
enthusiasm by clergy and laity alike. The circulation soared, enough
contributions came in so that hospitality could be provided for the down
and outs that made up our first staff.

Workers and scholars alike were down and out in the depression, and we
have always been the lame, the halt and the blind, the off scouring of
all, to use St. Paul's phrase, all through the years. "The gold is
ejected and the dross remains," one of our friends said of us. We were
greeted by those who did not know us as a pack of saints, and the legend
continued to grow, such a term giving an easy way out to those who felt
themselves to be happily more publicans than pharisees. Our standards
were too high, could not possibly be lived up to, but it was good to be
reminded of them. Such principles would not work, they showed pride and
presumption in a way, but they evidenced the longing in every human
heart for the lost Eden of the past and the Paradise we all hoped for in
the future. We were Utopians, in other words.

Full Freedom
---

Well, we have hung on to our personalist communitarian philosophy over
the years, and it has been called anarchism, pacifism, communitarian
socialism and many other things. But through all the years, there was
never any criticism from the chancery office in New York, New Jersey,
Chicago, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Omaha -- wherever there
were demonstrations about race or war.

The Baltimore House of Hospitality was closed as a public nuisance. It
was inter-racial when it was against the law to have both black and
white under the same roof in a hostel. Civil Disobedience began for us
then.

Irene Mary Naughton was arrested for picketing in an inter-racial
demonstration at Palisades Amusement Park. This was in the forties and
was just the beginning of CW involvement. But still the chancery offices
never interfered. They never committed themselves either.

Personal History
---

We were too busy to worry much about the attitudes of individual priests
in chancery offices or parishes. Somehow or other, I had always realized
that the church was made up of every political viewpoint as well as of
saints and sinners, that there was room for all, that people were the
product of their environment. Then too I had my own family to remind me,
a conservative one in many ways. My own father was most intemperate in
his remarks not only about the "foreigner" but about the Negro, coming
from Tennessee as he did, and there were my Georgia cracker cousins,
hard shelled Baptists, fundamentalists, Campbellites, religious bigots
and racists undoubtedly. And yet one could not **hate**them. They could
not prevent one from going one's own way. So it was the same with the
Church, the family of the Church, Churchmen became conservative; had to
hang on to the gains made in a country which spoke of Hunkies, Dagoes,
Spiks, Micks, greasers and so on. These despised ones showed that they
could make it too.

But the people didn't get much more "instruction" than the Asians St.
Francis Xavier reached with the teaching of prayers, and the pouring on
of water in baptism. Get to Sunday Mass, make your Easter duty, don't
marry outside the faith,--the grace of the sacraments would do all the
rest.

This was my first impression of the church until Peter Maurin opened my
eyes to the splendid literature of the church, the social teaching, and
I travelled and found like-minded people all over the country. From the
first we had the advice and instruction of good and holy, and learned
priests,--all of which gave us courage.

Routine Complaints
---

We were called to the chancery office occasionally. At first I saw only
Monsignor McIntyre, and later it was Monsignor Gaffney. It was always
over some trivial matter. After a few years, I felt that I understood
the technique. I would get a letter reading, "Dear Dorothy, if you
happen to be in the neighborhood, would you please drop in." I very
seldom was in the neighborhood of Fiftieth street,--all our work being
on the east side, but I took care to go at once. Monsignor McIntyre
would greet me in most friendly fashion and then press a button for a
stenographer. She would bring in a file, and he would open to a letter,
one of a long pile of letters, and holding his hand over the signature,
he would say, "We have received a complaint about something in the last
issue of the CW," and he would read out some line like "Would you have
your daughter go to the marriage bed with a Negro?" (I remember that
line well. This was from a satirical article by Robert Ludlow.) Quite
often the sentiments objected to were from his writings.

There was never any comment. But a few friendly inquiries about the
work. I do not recall how many times I had these meetings with Monsignor
McIntyre.

I remember once asking him for the use of an unoccupied rectory on the
east side. Insurance problems, probable trouble with the board of health
and the fire department and building department stood in the way,
however.

Backing a Loan
---

But he tried to help us. Before we got our Peter Maurin Farm on Staten
Island, I found a place on the beach down near Tottenville that I wanted
very much to buy and Bishop McIntyre, sympathizing with our money
problems, offered to back or sponsor a bank loan for us for fifteen
thousand dollars but that deal fell through because of the usual
housing, health and fire department restrictions, on our work.

No comment was ever made by the by-then bishop or archbishop about
political views. When we started to run articles like "War and
Conscription at the Bar of Christian Morals," by Monsignor Barry O'Toole
of the Catholic University and "The Crime of Conscription" and
"Catholics Can Be Conscientious Objectors," by Fr. John Jr. Hugo of
Pittsburgh, Bishop McIntyre merely commented, during one of these
aforesaid visits, "We never studied these things much in the seminary."
Shaking his head, and adding doubtfully, "There is the necessity of
course to inform one's conscience." And I assured him that that was what
we were trying to do.

A recent paper back called **The Essential Newman** carries part of
Cardinal Newman's correspondence with Gladstone in which he discusses
**conscience**, and he is reported to have said that if he were called
upon to propose a toast on such a subject, which was unlikely, he would
propose--"to conscience first, and to the Pope second." This was at a
time when there was great discussion of new dogma, infallibility of the
Pope.

Laymen lead
---

Bishop O'Hara of Kansas City once said to Peter Maurin, "You lead the
way,--we will follow." Meaning that it was up to the laity to plough
ahead, to be the vanguard, to be the shock troops, to fight these
battles without fear or favor. And to make the mistakes. And that has
always been my understanding. This business of "asking Father" what to
do about something has never occurred to us. The way I have felt about
Los Angeles is that the lay people had to go ahead and form their
groups, "Catholics for interracial justice," form their picket lines, as
they are only now doing, and make their complaints directly, to priest
and cardinal, demanding the leadership, the moral example they are
entitled to.

How can any priest be prevented from preaching the gospel of social
justice in the labor field and in the inter-racial field? One can read
aloud with loud agreement those messages from the encyclicals, which are
so pertinent to the struggles which are being carried on. One can tell
the gospel stories in the light of what is happening today. Do the poor
have the gospel preached to them today? Do we hear that resounding cry,
"Woe to the rich!" Do we hear the story of the rich man sitting at his
table feasting while the poor sat at the gate with neither food nor
medicare? How many priests have read Fr. Regamey's **Poverty**or
Shewring's **The Rich and the Poor in Christian Tradition**?

Poverty Frees
---

It is voluntary poverty which needs to be preached to the comfortable
congregations, so that a man will not be afraid of losing his job if he
speaks out on these issues. So that pastors or congregations will not be
afraid of losing the support of rich benefactors. A readiness for
poverty, a disposition to accept it, is enough to begin with. We will
always get what we need. "Take no thought for what you shall eat or
drink,--the Lord knows you have need of these things."

If more seminarians spoke out, even if the seminaries were emptied! (It
is said the seminaries of France were half emptied because of the
Algerian War, which went on for so long). If more young priests spoke
out while they continued to work hard and continued to "be what they
wished the other fellow to be," as Peter Maurin put it,--what happy
results might not be brought about.

But often the critical spirit results in dissertations, from church and
priesthood and seminary, and I suppose that is what the hierarchy fears.
We have plenty of experience of the critical spirit and have seen the
ravages that can be wrought in family and community. We have had many a
good worker leave because he could not stand the frustrations, because
"those in charge" did not throw out trouble makers, or force people to
do better. The critical spirit can be the complaining spirit too, and
the murmurer and complainer does more harm than good.

Freedom With Charity
---

If we could strive for the spirit of a St. Francis, and it would be good
to read his life and struggles, we would be taking a first step, but it
is only God himself who can make a saint, can send the grace necessary
to enable him to suffer the consequences of following his conscience and
to do it in such a way as not to seem to be passing judgment on another,
but rather win him to another point of view, with love and with respect.

**"You have heard that it hath been said, an eye for an eye, a tooth for
a tooth. But I say to you, Resist not evil: but if one strike thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him also the other; and if a man will contend
with thee in judgment and take away thy coat, let go thy cloak also unto
him, and whosoever will force thee to go one mile, go with him another
two. Give to him that asketh of thee, and of him that would borrow of
thee turn not away. You have heard that it hath been said, thou shalt
love thy neighbor and hate thy enemy. But I say to you, love your
enemies, do good to them that hate you; and pray for them that persecute
and calumniate you, that you may be children of your father who is in
heaven who makes his sun to rise upon the good and the bad, and raineth
upon the just and the unjust. For if you love them that love you, what
reward shall you have? Do not even the publicans this? And if you salute
your brethren only, what do you more? do not also the heathen this? Be
you therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect."**

Hard sayings indeed and no wonder that St. Peter said, in another
context, when Jesus said that it was harder for a camel to go through
the eye of the needle than for a rich man to get into the kingdom of
heaven, "Who then can be saved?" "With God all things are possible."

When a man, black or white, reaches the point where he recognizes the
worth of his soul (what does it profit a man if he gain the whole world
and suffer the loss of his soul?)--when he begins to realize what it
means to be a child of God, a son, an heir also, the sense of his own
dignity as a child of God is so great that no indignity can touch him,
or discourage him from working for the common good.

A Greater Task
---

It is for this that our shepherds are to be reproached, that they have
not fed their sheep these strong meats, this doctrine of men divinized
by the sacraments, capable of overcoming all obstacles in their advance
to that kind of society where it easier to be good.

Let Catholics form their associations, hold their meetings in their own
homes, or in a hired hall, or any place else. Nothing should stop them.
Let the controversy come out into the open in this way.

But one must always follow one's conscience, preach the gospel in
season, out of season, and that gospel is "all men are brothers."

This teaching is contained in all the work of the Confraternities of
Christian Doctrine. It just needs to be applied.
