% Technique of Agitation
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1933, 2.

_Summary: Distinguishes *The Catholic Worker* from other news
publications: "The purpose of a paper is to influence the thought of its
readers. We are quite frankly propagandists for Catholic Action." (DDLW
\#198)._

Father Gratry says that reading newspapers is a waste of time. One loses
sight of the eternal. (But we hope you won't take this to mean that
reading THE CATHOLIC WORKER is a waste of time.)

After reading the *New York Times*, the *Daily Worker*, the *Federated
Press*, the N.A.A.C.P. new service, the N.C.W.C. news service,
*America*, the *Commonweal*, the *Sign*, the *Nation*, *The New
Republic*, etc., etc., we bring out a December issue which only
glancingly touches on such news as the recent lynchings, codes, sweat
shops, housing problems and other news which demands critical comment.

Father Corbett came in to see us a couple of times last month. One day
he came in to converse, and another day to criticize, and he left his
ear phones off the second day, lest, I suppose, "we justify ourselves in
our sins."

"People say that you do too much criticizing," he said, "and don't point
out all that is being done."

We agree that much is being done--but so much more remains. "Never rest,
never rest, there's no peace on earth," we say cheerfully with our
patron saint of Teresa of Avila.

Hence we give much space this issue to detail plans and discuss Houses
of Hospitality, our recent Round Table Discussion, ideas for a Catholic
Workers' School.

We are not giving you news such as you get in your daily paper. We are
giving you ideas as to Catholic Action. We touch lightly on the hotel
worker's code, because hotel employees have come into the office and
told us of the conditions under which they work.

We describe conditions of factory work for girls, because it shows the
inefficacy of depending on codes (regulation) as compared to working for
a renewal of the Christian spirit. Our date-packing story also shows the
need of Houses of Hospitality for women workers at such wages.

The purpose of a paper is to influence the thought of its readers. We
are quite frankly propagandists for Catholic Action.

"You may think you are newspaper editors," Father Parsons, the editor of
"America," said a few months ago in friendly comment. "But agitators is
what you really are."
