% Explains CW Stand on Use of Force
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1938, 1, 4, 7.

*Summary: Clarifies the Catholic Worker position regarding the war in
Spain, opposing violence as a solution. Urges prayer for peace, love
instead of violence, and preparation for martyrdom. (DDLW \#216).*

Rev. Dear Father:

You are one of many priests and laymen who have written to us of the
*Catholic Worker* these past two years on the stand we have taken in the
Spanish conflict. Many times we have been misquoted, or sentences from
articles or public speeches have been taken from their context and
distorted, and our friends have written us with pain that our attitude
should seem to be at variance with that of Catholic leaders.

I am writing this letter to explain as best I can the points which we
are trying to bring out in the *Catholic Worker.* I am writing it with
prayer because it is so hard to write of things of the spirit--it is so
hard to explain. If we had made ourselves clear before, we should not
have to keep restating our position. But perhaps conflict is good in
that it brings about clarification of thought.

We all know that there is a frightful persecution of religion in Spain.
Churches have been destroyed and desecrated, priests and nuns have been
tortured and murdered in great numbers.

In the light of this fact it is inconceivably difficult to write as we
do. It is folly--it seems madness--to say as we do--"we are opposed to
the use of force as a means of settling personal, national, or
international disputes. As a newspaper trying to effect public opinion,
we take this stand. We feel that if the press and the public throughout
the world do not speak in terms of the counsels of perfection, who else
will?

We pray those martyrs of Spain to help us, to pray for us, to guide us
in the stand we take. We speak in their name. Their blood cries out
against the shedding of more blood to wash out theirs. Their blood cries
out against a spirit of hatred and savagery which aims towards a peace
founded upon victory, at the price of resentment and hatred enduring for
years to come. Do you suppose they died, saying grimly--"Alright--we
accept martyrdom--we will not lift the sword to defend ourselves but the
lay troops will avenge us!" This would be martyrdom wasted. Blood
spilled in vain. Or rather did they say with St. Stephen, "Father,
forgive them," and pray with love for their conversion? And did they not
rather pray, when the light of Christ burst upon them, that love would
overcome hatred, that men *dying* for faith, rather than *killing* for
their faith, would save the world?

Truly this is the folly of the cross! But when we say "Saviour of the
World, save Russia," we do not expect a glittering army to overcome the
heresy.

Folly of the Cross
------------------

As long as men trust to the use of force--only a superior, a more savage
and brutal force will overcome the enemy. We use his own weapons, and we
must make sure our own force is more savage, more bestial than his own.
As long we are trusting to force--we are praying for a victory by force.

We are neglecting the one means--prayer and the sacraments, by which
whole armies can be overcome. "The King is not saved by a great army,"
David said./ "Proceed as sheep and not wolves," St. John Chrysostom
said.

St. Peter drew the sword and our Lord rebuked him. They asked our Lord
to prove His Divinity and come down from the cross. But He suffered the
"failure" of the cross. His apostles kept asking for a temporal Kingdom,
even with Christ Himself to guide and enlighten them they did not see
the primacy of the spiritual. Only when the Holy Ghost descended on them
did they see.

Today the whole world has turned to the use of force.

While we take this stand, we are not condemning those who have seized
arms and engaged in war.

Who of us as individuals if he were in Spain today, could tell what he
would do. Or in China? From the human natural standpoint men are doing
good to defend their faith, their country. But from the standpoint of
the Supernatural--there is the "better way"--the way of the Saints--the
way of love.

Who of those who are combating *The Catholic Worker* stand would despise
the Christian way--the way of Christ? Not one.

Yet again and again it is said that Christianity is not possible--that
it cannot be practiced.

Age of Revolt
-------------

Today the whole world is in the midst of a revolution. We are living
through it now--all of us. History will record this time as a time of
world revolution. And frankly, we are calling for Saints. The Holy
Father in his call for Catholic Action, for the lay apostolate, is
calling for Saints. We must prepare now for martyrdom--otherwise we will
not be ready. Who of us if he were attacked now would not react quickly
and humanly against such attack? Would we love our brother who strikes
us? Of all at The Catholic Worker how many would not instinctively
defend himself with any forceful means in his power? We must prepare. We
must prepare now. There must be a disarmament of the heart.

Yes, wars will go on. We are living in a world where even "Nature itself
travaileth and groaneth" due to the Fall. But we cannot sit back and say
"human nature being what it is, you cannot get a man to overcome their
adversary by love.

We are afraid of the word love and yet love is stronger than death,
stronger than hatred.

If we do not, as the press, emphasize the law of love, we betray our
trust, our vocation. We must stand opposed to the use of force.

St. Paul, burning with zeal, persecuted the church. But he was
converted.

Again and again in the history of the church, the conquered overcome the
conquerors.

We are not talking of passive resistance. Love and prayer are not
passive but a most active glowing force.

And we ask with grief who are they amongst us who pray with faith and
with love, and so powerfully that they can move the mountains of hatred
that stand in our path. The soul needs exercise as well as the body and
if we do not exercise our soul in prayer now, we will be puny and
ineffectual in the trials that await us.

Peace Not Victory
-----------------

We are not praying for victory for Franco in Spain, a victory won with
the aid of Mussolini's son who gets a thrill out of bombing; with the
aid of Mussolini who is opposing the Holy Father in his pronouncements
on "racism"; with the aid of Hitler who persecutes the church in
Germany. Nor are we praying for victory for the loyalists whose
Anarchist, Communist and anti-God leaders are trying to destroy
religion.

We are praying for the Spanish people--all of them our brothers in
Christ--all of them Temples of the Holy Ghost, all of them members or
potential members of the Mystical Body of Christ.

And we add daily to this prayer for peace: "Lord, teach us to pray,:
"Lord I believe, help Thou my unbelief." "Lord, take away my heart of
stone and give me a heart of flesh."

\*\*\*
---

This editorial is not intended to be a complete statement of THE
CATHOLIC WORKER'S stand on the Spanish war. Neither does it purport to
be anything dogmatic, merely an expression of the sincere convictions of
THE CATHOLIC WORKER staff.
