% Poverty and Pacifism
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1944, 1, 7.

*Summary: Elaborates on the vision of voluntary poverty and what it
implies for the kind of work we do, what we eat and drink, how we
entertain ourselves. Recommends decentralized living and numerous books.
Says "We need saints. God, give us saints." (DDLW \#223).*

For the last month I have meditated on the use of spiritual weapons. In
Father John J. Hugo's pamphlet, "Weapons of the Spirit," he advocates as
weapons, devotion to the Sacred Heart and the Rosary. The love of the
humanity of our Lord is the love of our brother. The only way we have to
show our love for God is by the love we have for our brother. "Inasmuch
as you have done it unto one of the least of these My brethren, you have
done it unto Me." "You love God as much as the one you love the least."

Love of brother means voluntary poverty, stripping one's self, putting
off the old man, denying one's self, etc. It also means
non-participation in those comforts and luxuries which have been
manufactured by the exploitation of others. While our brothers suffer,
we must compassionate them, suffer with them. While our brothers suffer
from lack of necessities, we will refuse to enjoy comforts. These
resolutions, no matter how hard they are to live up to, no matter how
often we fall and have to begin over again, are part of the vision and
the long-range view which Peter Maurin has been trying to give us these
past ten years. These ideas are expressed in the writings of Eric Gill,
in the Dominican monthly, Blackfriars. And we must keep this vision in
mind, recognize the truth of it, the necessity for it, even though we do
not, can not, live up to it. Like perfection. We are ordered to be
perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, and we aim at it, in our
intention, though in our execution we may fall short of the mark over
and over. St. Paul says, it is by little and by little that we proceed.

Jobs and Work
===

Poverty will result from our examining our conscience as to jobs. (Since
beginning this article I have read Carol Jackson's article in *The
Living Parish*, which also takes up that question of voluntary poverty,
manual labor, and jobs. A beautiful presentation.)

If these jobs do not contribute to the common good, we pray God for the
grace to give them up. Have they to do with shelter, food, clothing?
Have they to do with the works of mercy? Fr. Tompkins says that everyone
should be able to place his job in the category of the works of mercy.

This would exclude jobs in advertising, which only increases people's
useless desires. In insurance companies and banks, which are known to
exploit the poor of the country and of others. Banks and insurance
companies have taken over land, built up farms, ranches, plantations, of
30,000, 100,000 acres, and have dispossessed the poor. Loan and finance
companies have further defrauded him. Movies, radio have further
enslaved him. So that he has no time nor thought to give to his life,
either of soul or body. Whatever has contributed to his misery and
degradation may be considered a bad job.

Manual Labor
===

If we examine our conscience in this way we would soon be driven into
manual labor, into humble work, and so would become more like our Lord
and our Blessed Mother.

Poverty means non-participation. It means what Peter calls regional
living. This means fasting from tea, coffee, cocoa, grapefruit,
pineapple, etc., from things not grown in the region where one lives.
One day last winter we bought broccoli which had the label on it of a
corporation farm in Arizona or Texas, where we had seen men, women and
children working at two o'clock in the morning with miners' lamps on
their foreheads, in order to avoid the terrible heat of the day, which
often reached 125 degrees. These were homeless migrants, of which there
are some million in the United States. Carey McWilliam's "Factories in
the Fields," which you can get at any library, tells of the conditions
of these workers. For these there is no room at the inn.

We ought not to eat food produced under such conditions. We ought not to
smoke, not only because it is a useless habit, but also because tobacco
impoverishes the soul and pauperizes the farmer, and means women and
children working in the fields. Poverty means having a bare minimum in
the way of clothes, and seeing to it that these are made under decent
working conditions, proper wages and hours, etc. The union label tries
to guarantee this. Considering the conditions in woolen mills, it would
be better to raise one's own sheep and angora goats and rabbits, and
spin and weave and make one's own blankets and stockings and suits. Many
groups are trying to do these things throughout the country, both as a
remedy for unemployment and for more abundant living. The School of
Living at Suffern, N.Y., the Catholic Rural Life Conference at Des
Moines, Iowa, both have publications discussing these ideas.

As for the dislocation in employment, if everyone started to give up
their jobs. Well, decentralized living would take care of such a
situation. And when we look at the dirty streets and lots in our slums,
the unpainted buildings, the necessity of a nationwide housing project,
the tearing down that needs to be done if we do not in the future wish
to have it done in the hard way and have them bombed down, then we can
see that there is plenty of employment for all in the line of providing
food, clothing and shelter for our own country and for the world. We
should read A.J. Penty on the machine and Fr. Vincent McNabb, the
greatest apostle of all. Their books are in all libraries.

Poverty means not riding on rubber while horrible working conditions
prevail in the rubber industry. (Read Vicki Baum's "Bleeding Wood," and
Andre Gide's "Congo Journey." And what a strange conglomeration of
authors I am handing out!) Poverty means not riding on rails while bad
conditions exist in the coal mines and steel mills. Poverty means not
accepting that courteous bribe from the railroads, the clergy rate.
Railroads have been built on robbery and exploitation. There are
stagecoaches, of course, and we are only about a century past them. But
pilgrims used to walk, and so did the saints. They walked from one end
of Europe and Russia to the other. We need saints.

Fr. Meus, the Belgian who is a Chinese citizen, since his missionary
life began in China, has walked thousands of miles. He said he would
dearly love to walk from one end of the United States to the other. Of
course, we are not all given the grace to do such things. This article
is to call to mind the *vision*. It is true, indeed, that until we begin
to develop a few apostles along these lines, we will have no mass
conversions, no social justice, no peace. We need saints. God, give us
saints.

How far we all are from it! We do not even see our infirmities. Common
sense tells us, "Why live in a slum? It is cheaper to live in a model
housing project, have heat and hot water, a mauve or pink bath and
toilet [ending missing].
