% Where Are the Poor? They Are In Prisons, Too
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1955, 1,8.

*Summary: A graphic description of how she and 29 others were treated by
the police, jailers, and courts after arrest for protesting air raid
drills against nuclear attack. Gives a reason for the protest and
decries the inhuman aspects of their treatment--crowding, lack of food,
waiting. Notes: "What a neglected work of mercy, visiting the prisoner."
(DDLW \#241).*

We probably all experienced different things, the thirty of us who were
arrested in City Hall Park at 2:05 p.m. June 15, for refusing to obey
the Air Raid wardens and taking to shelter.

Here are some of the impressions, written down two days after the event,
24 hours after I was released on \$1,500 bail from the Woman's Detention
Home, a prison on Greenwich Avenue, at Ninth Street, in the heart of
Greenwich village.

We, the thirty of us, were made up of seven from the Catholic Worker
Group, Eileen Fantino and her two companions from East Harlem, and
members of the War Resisters League and the Fellowship of
Reconciliation, and finally one lone bootblack named Rocco Parilli who
was arrested because he wanted a drink of water just as the warning
sounded. When the lawyers and judge turned to the papers, made out
perhaps at the Elizabeth Street station, the indictment was against Parilli and 29 others.

He led us all, and was oblivious to us all. He was the first in the
wagon and we thought him a member of the police force. He had on some
kind of badge and a crucifix in his breast pocket which he took out and
kissed now and again.

There were thirty of us piled in a police van meant to accommodate 10.
Why did we do it? What did the Chancery office think of it all? Of these
ten Catholics making a spectacle of themselves, "a spectacle to the
world, to angels and to men."

To answer that question, we got out one long leaflet, too long to be
reprinted here, and one short statement to be read before the news reel
camera. The short statement was inspired in this way. That morning in
the mail, an old autographed copy of **True Humanism** by Jacques
Maritain, filled with my own notes and markings, was returned in the
mail anonymously post mark, New York after many long years with a
borrower. The date of the publication was 1938, and it might have been
borrowed at that time. One of the places marked provided me with the
quotation I needed. My statement read:

We make this demonstration, not only to voice our opposition to war, not
only to refuse to participate in psychological warfare, which this air
raid drill is, but also as an act of public penance for having been the
first people in the world to drop the atom bomb, to make the hydrogen
bomb. We are engaging only ourselves in this action, not the Church. We
are acting as individual Catholics. Jacques Maritain, the French
philosopher has written, "We are turning towards men, to speak and act
among them, on the temporal plane, because, by our faith, by our
baptism, by our confirmation, tiny as we are, we have the vocation of
infusing into the world, wheresoever we are, the sap and savor of
Christianity."

The Long Afternoon
------------------

We went to the park at twelve thirty, after a light lunch at the
Catholic Worker and began to give out leaflets and papers, in front of
the Old Tribune building. At one thirty we went to the offices of the
War Resisters League at 5 Beekman Place, and met with Bayard Rustin and
A. J. Muste, where it was impressed upon everyone that the penalty for
our civil disobedience was one year in jail and a \$500 fine, and
everyone was asked if they wished to take that risk. Dick Kern, who
believes in non-cooperation to the extent of "going limp," was rebuked
as one who invited violence by his attitude, and he was told to go off
two blocks and demonstrate by himself. However he clung to the crowd and
went through his little act looking strangely pathetic and ridiculous as
he was lifted like some grotesque animal by the arms and legs,
unresisting but uncooperative by four large policemen. He is very young,
is Dick, and his large round moon face, and dangling arms and legs were
seen being pushed, or inserted through the narrow door where he joined
the bootblack.

I am sure, that in spite of the warning of Bayard Rustin there were
those among us coming along because it was a beautiful day, and there
were 29 of us and it looked like a party. Catholics are used to the idea
of martyrdom, reading daily in their missals the story of those who are
racked and torn and hung head downwards, thrown in caldrons of scalding
oil, flayed alive and flung to beasts, so that any suffering
imprisonment would entail should be considered slight indeed.

Just before two p.m. we went to the park and sat down on the benches
there, and when the sirens began their warning we continued to sit. That
was all there was to it. A number of elaborately uniformed men with much
brass, stars and ribbons upon their blue auxiliary police outfits
marched upon us and told us to move. When we refused, they announced we
were under arrest, and the police van was driven up inside the park, up
over the curb, and we were loaded in and driven away,

Elizabeth Street Station
------------------------

Our first stop brought us very near to our old headquarters at 115 Mott
Street. Every morning as we used to go to Mass on Mott Street we would
pass a platoon of uniformed men coming from the station to go on duty.
This was my first visit inside. The place is a barracks and is so
unadorned, so dirty, so unpainted, that it was as though the men took
pride in their unkempt quarters. In the large room where we were put
under guard, there was one large illustration on the wall of a policeman
aiming at a black target with many directions on how to shoot, to kill
or not to kill perhaps? One by one we were taken before the desk,
questioned, listed, and brought to still another room. Many of the girls
were asked if they took drugs. We were searched in a perfunctory manner
by a police woman, and a pen knife, given me a few weeks before by
Smokey Joe was taken away from me.

Thirtieth Street Station
------------------------

On our next ride the men were taken to Delancey and Clinton Streets, and
the women to Thirtieth Street. Our drivers seemed to get lost among one
way streets and we drove past St. Francis Church and around the block
before we arrived at the gloomy looking building which was a women's
detention house, where there was a cage, built within the building very
similar to the cages in which they house lions at the zoo. It is two
stories tall, built rather strangely into the building, and looking out
on dark bare walls. There is neither light nor air except artificial
light of course. The place had just been hosed down and was dripping
wet, ceilings, walls and floors. In each cell, into which we were locked
separately, there was a metal plank to sit or lie on, and an open
toilet. The front of the cell was open so that we could see several of
our neighbors. Judith Beck was opposite me, diagonally. It was by now
five o'clock and we had been detained three hours, and our demonstration
had been going on for five hours. Judith had not eaten since breakfast
and began asking for food. The matron, a young woman with a horse's tail
haircut was amiable enough, but made no attempt to allow us to sent out
and pay for sandwiches and coffee, or any other food. We were there
almost three hours and at Eight were brought downtown in another police
van to the Night Court which is held in the Center Street building which
is both the Tombs and courthouse. There we were, eleven of us, together
with two others, who were later increased by five more, kept in a tiny
cell, nine by eleven perhaps, with a bench along one wall, an open
toilet and sink in a corner, for the next four hours.

The cell was not big enough for us all to sit down. Usually four or five
of us had to be standing up. There were two other cells for the
accommodations of women, right alongside, but no attempt was made to use
these though the benches along two walls would have enabled some of the
women to lie down. There again we had no food and Judith, who is very
slight, was very hungry indeed, and again and again asked if we could
not get something to eat. The matron jokingly handed her a little packet
of six oatmeal cookies which she passed around, making half a cookie to
each. For fifteen or sixteen women there seemed to be an interminable
amount of paper work going on for all those hours, so no one had time to
provide anything to eat.

Judith is an actress in the Living Theatre Group, which has a little
playhouse on One Hundredth street, Manhattan. She and her husband were
playing in **Phedre**, by Racine. In our hours of association we found
Judith a gay and attractive little companion. She told us the story of
Phedra, and even acted part of it though she said that through hunger
she was forgetting all her lines.

Finally after much more standing and waiting, we were all called up to
Night Court, the men coming from down below stairs. They were able to
tell us that during their hours of waiting, they had been able to send
out for food which an attendant courteously served them, and they had
not, up to then been cramped as we were, into one tiny cell.

There was more waiting in a "bull pen," the "cooler," outside the court,
in a most inhuman cage, already crowded with human beings, men picked up
from the Bowery, from the parks, all kinds and colors and conditions of
men. We were all as crowded together as on a crowded subway.

When we were finally called out around eleven thirty into the court
which was filled with many of our friends, we were a bit light headed
with relief, perhaps. Anyway, when the police attendant began miscalling
everyone's names there were smiles on a great many faces.

Judge Kaplan began shouting at once, "what all the stir was about, and
Judith, from the wide semicircle which we had formed, spoke up in a very
clear voice, "We are hungry. We are light headed."

She was dressed rather dramatically all in white with a long white scarf
with her black hair falling down around her shoulders. She has clearly
marked beautiful features and very expressive eyes. She admits she is
always acting. That is her profession. "My husband and I greatly over
estimate my talent," she told us.

Anyway, she was acting, she was putting the post light on herself, and

in very much the wrong place. The judge demanded she come up before the
bench. He asked her if she had ever been in a mental institution (after
a few other questions) and she pertly replied, "No, have you?" This made
the judge go into a rage, an anything but judicious attitude. He lost
his temper completely, shouted, and demanded that she be taken to
Bellevue for observation.

Then occurred that scene which the World Telegram referred to
sarcastically in a description, as a riot staged by so-called pacifists,
of such dimensions that the additional squad cars had to be called out,
and 29 reserve policemen. Judith had screamed out at this sentence to
the Psychiatric ward, her husband had also shouted out and both were
dragged from the court room, he in one direction and she in the other.
There were such a crowd of prisoners, and Judith was struggling so, that
she was carried, by several police, above the heads of the defendants,
her little legs kicking like those of a ballet dancer. It was a terrible
scene. Several men cried out, some of the women started to weep, the
judge himself took a recess, demanding that we be sent back to the bull
pen. If anyone ever deserved to be sentenced to Bellevue psychiatric
ward, it was Judge Kaplan for his exhibition of temper.

Again we went back to that ugly pen, that cage where even more men had
been pressed in, and there again we waited, not only till the recess was
over, but also until a number of other cases had been called up. Our
whole night had been one of terrible waiting. Judith was brought down
stairs and we could hear her from above, screaming again and demanding
food.

Finally, when our case was called, we went back in the court to find it
had been cleared of spectators by the judge, and we were treated to a
speech by the judge in which we were called murderers, and our bail was
fixed at $1,500 each (we had expected fifty). The case was postponed
until June 23, and again we women were brought to that little pen
downstairs, where there was by now an additional drug addict, an old
Puerto Rican woman, crying aloud and staggering around the cell,
retching and overcome with stomach cramps. Her entire face was black and
blue and she complained that she had been kicked in the stomach. Judith
was sitting in there alone with her and three other colored prisoners,
dismal indeed. She was very sorry she had made such a scene, and had so
lost her temper. It should have been understandable what with hunger,
terrible fatigue, exhaustion too at seeing such human misery and such
actual but perhaps not realized sadism.

We were all kept there until two a.m. and still no food. Judith was
taken to Bellevue finally, and I suppose a great deal of red tape and
paper work, and rigmarole was gone through again.

Roger O'Neil and Charles McCormack, Agnes Bird and Betty Bartelme,
finally got sandwiches in to us at 2:30 a.m. before we were taken to the
detention house, where we sat another hour before we were assigned to
cells.

The pictures that will remain with us. There is one of Helen Russell and
Mary Ann McCoy sitting on either side of the drug addict, embracing her
and comforting her, as she writhes in agony, retching and crying out.
Her black hair hangs limp around her face and she looks more an Indian
than Puerto Rican or Negro. And I think how strange to see such loving
kindness and solicitude in a nurse when there is so much cold severity
in the nurses at the detention house on Greenwich street. There another
trained nurse in dealing with another drug addict who had voluntarily
committed herself said--" Go on, shake," taunting her. "Shake some more.
I am sure you can shake more than that. I've seen plenty putting on this
act, and better!" But Helen Russell is kind, kind, and Mary Ann embraces
the poor woman with her long slim white arms, and Eileen sits there, her
face green, her eyes half closed looking as though she were crucified.

Phedre
------

There is that picture of Phedre, her head thrown back, reciting with
rapt face the lines of Racine; and later singing with the others
Zumgali-gali, an Israeli song which has the refrain, "Man was made for
the land the land was made for man."

There are the two tall well dressed Negro girls who work in a jam
factory in Brooklyn, brought in on the complaint of the sister in law of
one of them in a dispute over fifteen dollars, and they laughed over the
ribald jokes and pranks played in their factory and when Edith Horwitz
said in surprise that people didn't act so in the factories where she
had worked, they laughed still more. All the girls sang together, and
the Negro girls with them, a Leadbelly song of the Georgia chain gang
which comes on records and has an expletive at the end of each line, a
gasped out "Wah!"

And then there is the line up in the courts, which we attended on three
other days after our release on bail, and the sight of men picked up on
the Bowery and in the city parks, and all the expensive machinery of
city government used to dole out fines and punishment to the pettiest of
offenders, those sleeping in the parks, selling neckties on the street
corners, begging alms. These are the poor who fill the jails, and occupy
the courts. The "big" man can hire lawyers, can "beat the rap," and when
he is really caught and imprisoned even then he is treated with respect
because he got away with it so long, or did it in a big way. The man who
begs an alms is arrested. The man who steals a million dollars is
honored. *Blessed are the poor, and cursed the rich*. These are not my
words but the words of scripture.

I emphasize the food aspect of the case because of what happened to
Judith. She had begun her day with the typical American breakfast of
toast and coffee, and had had nothing substantial for more than
twenty-four hours. On any fast, it is the first twenty-four hours that
is hard. After that it is easier as those of us who have fasted up to
ten days know. Also I wish to emphasize the fact that being sent to the
psychiatric ward is often used here in New York as a threatened
punishment and a punishment for anyone who is not subservient and
submissive to the abuse of authority, to any one who speaks up against
injustice in our public hospital wards. Our old friend John Griffen had
had a spat with a nurse in the t.b. hospital on Welfare Island and had
been shipped over to the psychiatric division. When Steve Hergenhan
complained of the food at the Municipal lodging house, he had been so
threatened. Steve wrote some articles afterwards for the CW on the
Municipal lodging house and when the city sent delegates to us asking
why we had not complained to them instead of publishing the articles, we
told them of this new form of punishment--sentencing to a madhouse
rather than a prison. A psychiatric ward is for treatment, not
punishment.

Another thing I would like to call attention to is the inhuman crowding.
From the outside the Tombs is a great imposing building, but inside we
were packed like animals for shipment in cages. We saw these same cages
at Delancey street, Thirtieth street and Second street. We pass by them
daily and do not realize that inside are men and women penned, inside
there is the weeping and the groaning of despair. What a neglected work
of mercy, visiting the prisoner.

"When were you in Prison, Lord, and we did not visit you?" It is a hard picture Christ presents. He did not forgive this ignorance. "Inasmuch as you did not visit these prisoners ye did not visit Me."

"But they are guilty, they are the scum of the earth, they are the
refuse, they are the offscourings. They drink, they take dope, they are
prostitutes. They are vicious themselves and they make others vicious.
They even sell drugs to little children. They are where they belong.
Prison is too good for them. We can't pamper them."

"I have come to call them to repentance. I have come to be with
publicans and sinners. I have come for the lost sheep. I am more there
with these most miserable ones than with the judges sitting on the high
seats." This is not sentimentality. This is truth.

Oh yes, one can hear these things very plainly lying in a cell when we
were finally permitted to lie down, locked in again in these rows of
cages, in a bare stark cell that would outdo the Carmelite in austerity.
It was good to kneel there on the floor beside the bed and thank God for
the opportunity to be there, to be so stripped of all the earth holds
dear to share in some little way the life of prisoners, guilty and
innocent, all over the world.

This was but a slight experience, this imprisonment, and our readers
have no opportunity actually of visiting the prisoner, we realize that.
We have got to pray. With love, there is not time, no space, nor bars.
