% On Pilgrimage - March 1966
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1966, 1, 2, 6, 8.

*Summary: Admits "rambling" about her grandchildren, her reading habits,
and books she recommends before getting to the point--"I am afraid I am
a traditionalist." She reaffirms her high regard for the liturgical
movement and the Mass, objecting to an incident where a coffee cup is
used for a chalice. She speaks of CW conflicts and the ongoing struggle
of freedom and authority. (DDLW \#249).*

March 1966

This last weekend I have been visiting with my daughter Tamar and my
seven grandchildren who are at home. (The oldest two are away in nursing
school and at the State university.) Tamar worked Saturday, Sunday and
Monday at the hospital where she is a practical nurse, so I stayed
through Tuesday to have more of a visit with her. It was a holiday for
the children too, since there was annual town meeting at Weathersfield,
a mile up the hill. Right after breakfast Martha, Hilaire, Maggie, Mary,
Ronda and Katey set out for the walk on a beautiful sunny day, along the
muddy road past snowdrifts which were swelling the rivulets into brooks
along the roadside.

Hilaire came back within an hour or so wet to his hips--he had fallen
into a real brook with the exciting news that they were tapping the
maples up the hill and that he was going to get busy himself. Hilaire is
eight, and has been using a hatchet since he was three, so he went about
his job with efficiency, gathering pails, spouts, hooks, augur and so
on, ready to clamber again through snow and slide on tee to reach the
trees. He did change his already wet clothes, though he thought it
unreasonable of me to ask him to, since he was going to get wet again.
The kitchen was filled with ski shoes and snow shoes and ski poles and
skis and double thicknesses of socks and mittens and colorful caps, not
to speak of all the other changes of clothing necessary for a family
devoted to the outdoors. While I was there several teen-aged boys added
to the confusion of the front rooms where Eric, Nickie and Hilaire were
already sleeping. The skiers got off at dawn, leaving a half dozen
children still in the house.

Whenever I start worrying about my grandchildren, who range in age from
five to twenty-one (or about any of the other young ones who swarm
around the, Catholic Worker these days), I comfort myself with the
thought, "God, who is love, loves them much better than I possibly
could, He holds them in the hollow of His hand." Sally Corbin, who is
three, sings: "Praise to the Lord, the Almighty, the King of Creation"
and "He holds them in His hands." What a comfort to hear her!

Consolations of Religion
------------------------

Fr. Joseph McSorley, C.S.P., my first spiritual director, gave me
**Caussade's Abandonment to Divine Providence** to read many years ago.
We, who are such activists, need more of this teaching. No danger of
Quietism with Catholic Worker enthusiasts. A little more quiet, a little
more time to read and digest might help. When I was becoming a Catholic,
I had only such books as the **Confessions** of St. Augustine and the
**Imitation** to begin on. There had always been Scripture, and even in
childhood I almost had the feeling of partaking of a sacrament in
holding it and reading. The first time I went to jail with the
suffragists in Washington, at the age of eighteen, and asked for the
only book I knew they would give me to read, I wept over the Psalms,
wept with joy at their comfort. And at the same time felt ashamed at
turning o religion when there was nothing else to turn to.

Of course, there were, and always will be, great gaps in my
understanding of such questions as the problem of evil in the world and
God's permission of it. I cringe still at Ivan Karamazov's portrayal of
"a God that permits" the torture of children, such torture as is going
on today in the burning alive of babies in Vietnam. Theologians debate
situation ethics and the new morality (leaving out of account the
problem of means and ends) while the screams of the flaming human
torches, civilian and soldiers, rise high to heaven. The only conclusion
I have ever been able to reach is that we must pray God to increase our
faith, a faith without which one cannot love or hope. "Lord, I believe,
help thou my unbelief."

The debate I read recently was published in the Commonweal for January
14th; it was between Dr. Joseph Fletcher, of Cambridge Theological
Seminary, and Father Herbert McCabe, the English Dominican. From the
conclusions of many who wrote letters about the debate Dr. Fletcher won,
hands down. He did not mention morality in connection with the current
war, although he has long been active in the non-religious peace
movement, with which, according to a survey of the peace movement among
the clergy, it is more respectable to be involved than with the
religious-oriented and "extremist" Fellowship of Reconciliation or the
Catholic Worker movement. It was Father McCabe who spoke of the morality
of burning babies alive, among other references to the war. The articles
were difficult for the nontheological layman, but it seemed to me that
Father McCabe's larger vision was a far nobler, reasonable and faithful
presentation. When I have four days in Vermont with the grandchildren
who work and play hard and get to bed early, I read at night, go over
the back issues of the **Commonweal**, and catch up on what I have
missed. It has been exceptionally good lately.

The best of the weekly Catholic newspapers is of course **the National
Catholic Reporter**. Among magazines, the **Critic** is always good, as
are **Jubilee** and **Cross Currents**. Last month I saw my first copy
of **Slant**, a bimonthly, published by a group of students in
Cambridge, England, and find I have missed only the first four numbers.
Adrian Cunningham has a first-rate article in the Winter, 1965 issue on
Christians and Marxists and a review of the **Socialist Register**.
Gordon Zahn has a striking article on "Unilateralism as a Moral and
Political Commitment," which we should reprint. It is a convention of
editors to shun reprintings, but we feel that our eighty-eight thousand
circulation (how many readers can you count to a single paper) should
have the benefit of Dr. Zahn's thinking. Peter Maurin never hesitated to
repeat and repeat again his phrased essays. Good teacher that he was,
repetition meant that sooner or later an idea got across. It is like
reading the Psalms each day in the Office of the Church. Over and over
again sudden light shines through on what had been passed over before as
obscure. The best explanations of the Psalms, especially the warlike
ones, are in C. S. Lewis' book **Reflection on the Psalms**.

Most of my reading at the Catholic Worker farm is done early in the
morning and since my bed is by the window, I can draw back the curtain,
which keeps out the cold air that seems to come right through the panes
of glass, and watch the fading stars and the emerging dawn. On a clear
morning it is wonderful to see mountains across the river first touched
at their tips by the light. One has the feeling then that the sun is not
"coming up" but that this so solid earth is turning. The snow is gone,
here in New York State, and the deep lavender glow on the mountains
turns to rose and then to gold. The ice has broken up and this morning
the tide was coming in and the ice floes were journeying toward Albany.
(The Indians used to call the Hudson "the river which flows two ways.")
It is a good time to read the Psalms, which always give one courage to
face the day.

In his new book **Seasons of Celebration**, (Farrar, Straus and Giroux),
Thomas Merton writes: "The presence of Christ in the liturgical
celebration (and reading the Office is part of it) leads to our
discovery and declaration of our own secret and spiritual self. Let us
above all remember and admire the discretion, the sobriety and the
modesty with which the liturgy protects the personal witness of the
individual Christian."

God In Russia
-------------

This column is becoming something of a book review but before I go on I
must mention two other books in which I have taken great JOY and
inspiration this past month. One is **With God In Russia**, by Walter J.
Ciszek, S.J. with Daniel L, Flaherty, S.J. (now in Image Paperback) and
it is one of the greatest adventure stories I have read. Born in the
mining region of Pennsylvania of Polish parents, the boy Walter was a
"tough" as he described himself, a bully, a leader of a gang, who
suddenly decided in the eighth grade that he wished to be a priest. From
priest to Jesuit to missionary to Russia, he stubbornly made up his mind
what he wanted to do, it was in the Stalin era that this dream possessed
him, and his superiors helped him each step along the way. He went to
the Russian college in Rome, was sent to Poland first and was there when
it was invaded by the Germans and then the Russians. It was this World
War that gave him his opportunity, with several comrades, to get into
Russia, as a laborer in the Urals. From there he went as prisoner, with
thousands of others, through the prisons of Russia: Lubianka and the
Siberian camps of Dudinka and Norilsk at the mouth of the Yenisei River,
deep in the Arctic regions. There is no bitterness, no condemnation in
the story. It is all taken as part of a life where war, revolution
dominate men, a recognition of the times of vast social changes and
struggles in which we live. The man is heroic in his endurance and in
his work, into which he throws himself with a zeal as though he were
fighting for his own country, his own kind. As a matter of fact, the
impression all through the book is of a man who considers all men his
brothers. Over and ever again, whenever he gets a chance he builds up a
tiny parish which grows openly until he is transferred someplace else.
Even after regaining his freedom he remains in Russia, working in
Krasnoyarsk, until he finally gets in contact with his sisters in the
States, and they, with the help of his order and the State Department,
arrange a transfer of prisoners between the United States and the Soviet
Union, which results in his being sent back to New York.

He lived through the Stalin era and through the great strikes that took
place in the prison camps after the death of Stalin, which resulted in
the betterment of the conditions for prisoners and workers too. It is a
story of courage and endurance, and in the main of nonviolence, since
there was no possibility of armed revolt. Throughout, Father Ciszek's
main thought, aside from his will to survive, is to serve his people, to
offer the liturgy, which he can do in the Russian rite, to give
communion, to hear confessions, all under the most difficult conditions
imaginable. Thank God for such men as Father Ciszek!

Another book which I am carrying about with me is Father Ernesto
Balducci's **John, the Transitional Pope** (McGraw-Hill). It is a book,
like the **Journal of a Soul**, which gives joy to the heart.

Father Balducci is a profound thinker, of deep insight. He was on trial
and given a suspended sentence for advocating conscientious objection in
Italy, where it is against the law. But this book is all about John and
his teaching, about the times he lived in and how he reacted to those
times. There are many excerpts from his speeches and sermons and there
are Father Balducci's comments about them, which are as delightful as
those of the Holy Father himself.

When burdens seems to increase and the family grows ever larger, and the
news, every hour on the hour, repeated again and again, makes sad the
heart, then it is good to pick up a book like this and learn again what
Father Balducci calls "the law of delight," the law that presided over
the work of creation, as Scripture tells us when it speaks of Wisdom,
which played like a delighted child in the sight of the Almighty Father
Creator, rejoicing before him always!"

Mary, cause of our Joy, pray for us. Pope John, help us all to keep our
balance in this heady time of renewal.

The Unwanted
---

A ragged old man with a sandwich in his pocket came in and set in the
back of the church this morning. One of the parishioners who had just
been to communion started shooing him out. "He is smoking!" she said,
shaking her head. "Don't you smoke in here," and she was like a little
mother hen driving him before her.

It was raining outside and there was no park bench on which to! rest. He
was either sleeping in some vacant house or at the Municipal lodging
house on Third street half dozen blocks away and was put out early in
the morning with his sandwich. Perhaps he did not know he was in church.
Peter Maurin in his last five years lost his mind and got lost himself
in city and country, and even in the house of hospitality itself.
Sometimes he did not even know where he was supposed to sleep. Once
previously in the face of the apparent failure to reach those to whom he
was talking, the young married men who wished to divide the farming
commune among themselves, excluding the single except as family
servants), Peter perhaps wishing to "endorse" himself (as Recovery terms
it) in the face of discouragement, said sadly, "I have never asked
anything for myself." Not even a bed. He was truly poor.

I was writing in church myself when this little incident occurred and
perhaps to the purist I should have been put out. But I was trying to
put down my problems of this immediate present, hoping that it would
help me solve them or make a beginning. Often I have done this, only to
find six months later that the problems had somehow disappeared (though
sometimes only by the persons that caused them disappearing from the
immediate vicinity themselves.) Perhaps this is what I secretly want,
but that is really no solution. This morning radio news came that two
companions of Castro in his Cuban revolution had just been arrested on
charges of conspiring to assassinate him, presumably with the connivance
of the CIA. The charge of plotting to assassinate in order to overthrow
governments has been brought so often against "a United States agency"
that one wonders. Were Bonhoeffer and his companions in their plot to
assassinate Hitler aided by such an agency? Assassinations, by
whomsoever they are attempted or perpetrated, are murders and do not
solve the problems, which are always deep-seated, going back into the
past. Cut off the head of one tyrant and half a dozen others spring into
place. Nor do removals by any other means solve problems which will
always he with us. The need is to change the minds and hearts of men.
Which is part of the tactics of guerrilla war too, but unfortunately it
is neutralized, wiped out by the violence and terror which accompanies
it all.

St John Chrysostom says in regard to our Lord's sending us out as sheep
among wolves, that if we become wolves ourselves, He is no longer with
us.

But to try to face up to some of my problems: The incident of the man
smoking in church leads me to one of the problems but perhaps a most
basic one, the lack of the reverence and respect that we should have for
holy things, and for all men as creatures of God. God, the Father,
created us and all the universe, so all things are holy. One may laugh
for joy, but not in derision.

The Liturgical movement has meant everything to the Catholic Worker from
its very beginning. The Mass was the center of our lives and indeed I
was convinced that the Catholic Worker had come about because I was
going to daily Mass, daily receiving Holy Communion and happy though I
was, kept sighing out, "Lord, what would you have me to do? Lord, here I
am." And I kept hearing his call, as Samuel did, but I did not know what
he wanted me to do.

And then Peter Maurin came. A group formed around us, including a young
girl from Manhattanville and a young man who had tried his vocation with
the Franciscans and was still, as a layman, interested in the Divine
Office. So there was added to our lives within the first few months, the
recitation of some of the Hours, sometimes Vespers, always Compline.
Never Prime, because most of the young people liked to stay up late at
night and sleep late into the day. I myself had done the same at their
age. It was their turn now. Usually they missed Mass, unless they could
get to the noonday one, as Peter did. Older people usually become early
risers, and it is always said that they do not need as much sleep as
young people.

So we became familiar with the Office, and the four-volume translation
of the entire Office in Latin and English soon fell into our hands,
gifts of generous friends. Now there is the Short Breviary put out by
St. John's at Collegeville, Minn. Then there were the pamphlet editions
of Prime and Compline. So we got to know Psalms. We used the missal
because we wanted to pray with the understanding and we were ardent
supporters of the vernacular movement and were delighted that one of the
former heads of the South Bend House of Hospitality, Julian Pleasants,
wrote for their publication, Amen.

We had our communion procession and even the altar facing the people, as
far back as 1937-- summer Fr. Joseph Woods, O.S.B. came to spend his
vacation with us, sweating in the fields (we still have a picture of him
in the beanfield).

I myself got into trouble over that move, because the activists who were
working on the farm that summer, when asked by Father Joseph to help
rearrange the farm chapel for the Mass, passed the buck by saying "Let's
wait till Miss Day gets back," whereupon he informed them it was his
business, and he informed me on my return from the city that I must be a
tyrant indeed if they had to await my permission before they could
assist at rearranging the altar. He was not very observant, living at
the Catholic Worker where the motto was, "Love God and do as you will."
St. Augustine said that.

I suppose I am rambling because I hate to get to the point, and that
point is that I am afraid I am a traditionalist, in that I do not like
to see Mass offered with a large coffee cup as a chalice. I suppose I am
romantic too, since I loved the Arthur legend as a child and reverenced
the Holy Grail and the search for it. I feel with Newman that my faith
is founded on a creed, as Rev. Louis Bouyer wrote of Newman in that
magnificent biography of his.

"I believe in God, Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth. And of
all things visible and invisible, and in His Only Son Jesus Christ, our
Lord."

I believe too that when the priest offers Mass at the altar, and says
the solemn words, "This is my body, this is my blood," that the bread
and the wine truly become the body and blood of Christ, Son of God, one
of the Three Divine persons. I believe in a personal God. I believe in
Jesus Christ, true God and true man. And intimate, oh how most closely
intimate we may desire to be, I believe we must render most reverent
homage to Him who created us and stilled the sea and told the winds to
be calm, and multiplied the loaves and fishes. He is transcendent and He
is immanent. He is closer than the air we breathe and just as vital to
us. I speak impetuously, from my heart, and if I err theologically in my
expression, I beg forgiveness.

Peter Maurin's synthesis of cult, culture and cultivation, painted by
Rita Corbin on the dining room wall at the farm at Tivoli, constantly
calls to mind the struggle. Cult was ever surrounded by beauty and glory
and majesty of stone and stained glass, precious incense, tapestry,
music, all the exterior and interior senses of man responding to the
needs to worship, praise, and render thanks to God. Friends of the
Catholic Worker family earn their living by contributing to this
beauty--Carl Paulson of Upton with his stained glass and Michael
Humphrey with his chalices (as his father before him) Ade Bethune with
her crucifixes and pictured saints and stained glass, not to speak of
entire churches to her credit; Graham Carey, silversmith, calligrapher,
woodcarver, etc.

We begin the Mass by the confession of sins, admitting our
creatureliness, and all the beginnings of disorder that there are in us,
and part of our thanksgiving is because of the forgiveness of sin and we
do not dwell on falls and failures but go swiftly on to the prayers of
praise and adoration and thanksgiving.

To me the Mass, high or low, is glorious and I feel that though we know
we are but dust, at the same time we know too, and most surely through
the Mass that we are little less than the angels, that indeed it is now
not I but Christ in me worshiping, and in Him I can do all things,
though without Him I am nothing. I would not dare write or speak or try
to follow the vocation God has given me to work for the poor and for
peace, if I did not have this constant reassurance of the Mass, the
confidence the Mass gives. (The very word confidence means "with
faith.")

It is one thing for a Father Ciszek to offer Mass, to consecrate the
wine in a coffee cup in the prison camps of Siberia. It is quite another
thing to have this happen in New York. And yet--and yet--perhaps it
happened to remind us that the power of God did not rest on all these
appurtenances with which we surround it. That all over the world, in the
jungles of South America and Vietnam and Africa --all the troubled,
indeed anguished spots of the world--there Christ is with the poor, the
suffering, even in the cup we share together, in the bread we eat. "They
knew Him in the breaking of bread."

When I spoke to the priest about the coffee-cup incident afterward, (I
was not there when this happened though twenty of the family of the
Catholic Workers were there), he said, "I was just doing as I was told."
There was another great controversy at the Catholic Worker some ten
years ago when Fr. Faley referred to his Mass, and some of the all-out
young people, with a terrible lack of charity, railed at him,
proclaiming that it was our Mass. They had been well trained in the
liturgical movement, but oh the cruelty in the way in which they made
their assertions!

Sometimes it seems to me that every kind of warfare is carried on around
the Catholic Worker. There is the war between young and old, colored and
white, and class war, between the haves and have nots. Only this
morning, on hearing that I was going to New England for a week, one of
the poor women staying with us said bitterly, "it costs a lot of money
to travel around the way you do." (Since this charge has been made by
some of our readers, I must explain that we are paid for most of the
talks we are asked to give.) But what resentment between those who have
no money in their pockets and those who have-between the worker and the
scholar, in other words.

Peter Maurin was well acquainted with these conflicts and lifted them
all to a higher level, and I suppose I should put this conflict over the
way the Mass should be said under the heading of the authority and
freedom conflict. The priest has the authority and in this case he did
not exercise it. He wanted, I suppose as St. Paul said, "To be subject
to every living creature," as Jesus was in His crucifixion.

We went to press on February 16th last month, and that same day I went
with Ruth Collins to see a house on the East Side which is just what we
need for our House of Hospitality. The cost is thirty-five thousand
dollars, a modest sum when one considers the cost of houses today for a
family alone. Our family is an oversized one, and this house will mean
two large apartments for men, one for women, offices for the work and
the usual dining room and kitchen. We have ten thousand dollars, which
we can use as a down payment but the rest will have to be mortgages,
including repairs to conform to the Building Code. If we can raise what
seems to us to be an enormous sum of money, we can pay it off each year
in payments which will be less than what we are paying now for the rents
of Chrystie Street and the ten apartments, not to speak of the heating
of five apartments and of the loft building at Chrystie Street. We have
already paid enough in the last five years to have bought the house as
it is, that is without repairs. St. Joseph, pray for us. In these
inflationary times it is no longer possible to live as we did at the
beginning of the Catholic Worker. To try to be poor in an affluent
society is hard indeed.

This month I spoke in Worcester, Boston, Kingston (Rhode Island) and now
I go to D.C., invited by Bishop John J. Wright, of Pittsburgh, to attend
an interfaith peace conference. April l3th I must go to the Mid-west: to
the University of Minnesota.
