% On Pilgrimage - March 1973
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March-April 1973, 2, 6.

*Summary: An obituary for Catholic Worker Mike Sullivan. Comments on
letter writing, new books, and the vocation of writing. (DDLW \#257).*

A few days ago, early in the morning, Alice Lawrence, one of the hardest
working members of our house of hospitality on the land, called me to
come to see Mike Sullivan. His face was pale and strained. She had
brought him his morning coffee and found him almost unconscious,
struggling for breath. Most of us in these upstairs rooms are the older
ones with various disabilities. Mike had been in and out of the hospital
all winter, and it would take persuading to make him go again. Alice,
with all her other duties, looked after him, as she had so many others.

His oxygen machine was on the table, and while I held his hand, Alice
put it to his lips, helping him breathe. It took some talking, but
finally he nodded his head he would go. Our people want to die at home.
Our local volunteer ambulance came at once, and Mike was given every
care, but he died twenty-four hours later. He was "waked" at White's
funeral parlor in Rhinebeck the following night, and next morning six
pall bearers (his fellow workers at the farm) carried the casket into
the church of St. Sylvia in Tivoli, just as Hans Tunnesen had been last
month.

Mike Sullivan, Worker
---
The funeral liturgy was offered by Father Andy who also gave the homily.
He spoke to us about life.

After the Mass our little cortege followed Mr. White's station-wagon
(which was the hearse) to the little cemetery on 9G, just north of
Tivoli. Mike Sullivan is buried there with nine others of our C.W.
family in the large plot which St. Sylvia's pastor, Msgr. Kane
generously gave us.

John Filliger had made white birch crosses, and Laura Waes had lettered
the names on them. There was a row of nine of them there now.

The night before Mike died, some of us had read the Vesper psalms from
the Office of the Dead in the little chapel which Mike himself, with the
help of Kay Lynch, had partitioned off at the end of the long,
fifteen-bed dormitory which had been a casino years ago.

It would have been better if we who had gathered at the funeral parlor
to say the rosary which Fr. Andy led, could have "waked" him in the
chapel he built. Or even in the Community room, as we did years ago for
Peter Maurin on Mott Street.

But with a population of babies (seven under five), early teenagers, and
older teenagers, and the use of the Community room as library, sewing
room, play room, ping pong room and conference room, it is not
practicable to lay out the dead there. And our chapel is too small.

That community room, with its fifty feet of windows along the front, had
been screened by Mike in summer, and sealed with plastic in winter to
keep out the gales. Wherever you look Mike had worked. Plumbing jobs,
un-stopping toilets and sinks, seeing about fuses and electrical work,
furnaces and water heaters. Mike was a knowledgeable man.

Many, too, were the kindnesses Mike did for the women of the house. The
old as well as the young. He liked and helped women. Getting up early as
working men and children do, he was the one Sally, years ago (she is now
ten) and Coretta Corbin (four) demanded breakfast from -- an egg, toast,
milk, cereal. He waited on them to let Rita get a little more
much-needed sleep.

Coretta visited him daily on his sickbed before he was too ill, and we
could hear a long one-sided conversation (a confusion of terms there)
going on, little chatterbox as she was. Mike's smile was enough for her.
It wasn't the candy he kept in his room--it was a *listener*she wanted.

God bless Mike Sullivan. May he rest in Peace. It has been very hard to
write this little obituary, coming so soon as it does after Jack
English's and Hans Tunnesen's deaths.

Mail and Jottings
---

The rest of this column will be "jottings." They were written before
Mike died.

As a pilgrim, I comfortably stay at home and travel with maps, books,
newspapers and journals. Maps may include detailed maps of Dutchess and
Columbia counties on this side of the Hudson River where we live, and
later, the counties on the other side. Then perhaps, when I catch up
with mail, I can write some "rural rides" as Cobbett did in the Everyman
edition. I must ask Stanley Vishnewski to hunt for them next time he
goes to New York.

Stanley is now giving slide talks about the history of the Catholic
Worker. He just gave one at a Friday night meeting, enthusiastically
received. He'll tell all his jokes, two of the simplest and most famous
being, "We change the sheets on our beds every week-- from one bed to
another," and "Yes, we have room for you if you don't mind sleeping
thirteen in a bed," and so on.

"When my mail is caught up"-- "When I catch up on mail"--phrases always
on my lips. Stanley says, "Half of it doesn't need answering." He
himself had just received a letter asking for all my writings, tapes,
pictures, etc., because the writer was going to write a thesis. "Just
throw it in that shopping bag full of mail which is going to the
archives," he says.

It is true, I cannot keep up with the letters. The paper itself should
answer questions asked. Read the **Catholic Worker**. If you are
be-fuddled by it ask God to enlighten you. The gifts of the Holy Spirit
should enlighten you. Pray for *knowledge*(and forgive me for trying to
take a sabbatical leave from letters as well as speaking).

Our May issue, marking our 40th Anniversary, will have articles written
by some of our editors. We hope it will be the kind of paper which we
can hand and send out when we are asked, ''What is The Catholic Worker
all about?" I'm supposed to write on "Anarchism-Personalism."

Publishing
---

Harper's has sent me a little book for review of beautiful,
enlightening, thought-provoking quotations from Teilhard de Chardin. It
is a small, gift size book, bound in white, looking as though it were
meant for a wedding gift since the title is **Love**. But it is for
everyone, no matter what age or condition. Sex, energy, chastity, love--
too bad I can't quote a paragraph, but one has to ask permission of
publishers and pay for such paragraphs, I'm told. (I cannot remember the
price of the book.)

Speaking of prices of books and royalties to authors, the author gets
10% of the price of the book, hard cover. But by the time advance
"royalties' are taken out (strange word, that, for rather insignificant
sums), plus pay to some editorial assistant one could well do without (a
former editor of a trade paper of Standard Oil was assigned to me once),
and retyping (of course), how that first check decreases in size! And as
for paper backs, editions of 75,000 are paid for by a $750 advance.
Does that mean the author gets 7 and a half cents a copy? I am all mixed up. I'm
not good on arithmetic--someone else is-- and 2 and a half cents a copy. So I warn
all would-be authors never to expect to earn a living by writing. To be
a writer one needs to have an overpowering desire to be heard.

But here it is Lent, and I should be fasting from "wanting to be heard."
So many sorrowful letters come in, and one feels one must remind those
writers of the "duty of delight" as Ruskin phrased it. "To rejoice
always, again I say rejoice" (the message of St. Paul). To tell them to
pray for consolation, healing, light, courage, strength to endure.
Prayers are always answered (one way or another). Such prayers bring
strange joy on occasion, even in the midst of seemingly unmitigated
grief, even despair. Even in the midst of horror, one suddenly feels the
touch of God's hand, and knows with Julian of Norwich that somehow or
other "all will be well"--that "the worst has already happened and been
repaired."

Other Books
---

Curtis Paperbacks, through its editor Patrick O'Connor, wishes me to
call attention to the fact that my three books, **The Long
Loneliness**,** Loaves and Fishes**, and **On Pilgrimage--The
Sixties,** are available at $1.25 a copy. When I look at them I think,
"I have written enough." But then I remember that admonition of Father
John J. Hugo--"He who says he has done enough has already perished."

Don't write me for the source of the quotation. Write him. He is head of
the Liturgical Commission of the Pittsburgh Diocese and has written many
books himself, which ought to be read.

There is a "cottage industry" just begun and off it goes to a good
start, bringing out a box of twelve tapes of Thomas Merton on
**Prayer**. It was a joy to hear his voice. These conferences to his
novices are well worth the money. You can buy them \$8.95 each, a few at
a time, if you cannot afford them all. Far better than any other taped
conferences I have heard. Very lively! Address: Electronic Paperbacks,
Box 2, Chappaqua, New York, 10514.
