% Day by Day - June 1934
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1934, 7

*Summary: Tales of young women struggling to find shelter and work in
the midst of economic depression. (DDLW \#278).*

May 2. Although the Communists and socialists had their hundreds of
thousands out in the streets yesterday, we feel that the CATHOLIC WORKER
made its presence felt, too. Fifteen or more high school and college
students, from Manhattan, Fordham, St. John's College, Cathedral College
and from City College, distributed papers and leaflets In the streets
all afternoon and in the evening up around Columbus Circle and Madison
Square Garden.

The man who was selling the I.W.W. paper in Madison Square came up to
get a copy from me and said, "I was a Catholic myself once -- I'd like
to see your paper,"' and people of all nationalities were anxious to get
it.

One young woman came in this morning who said she had seen a copy in the
square and wanted to find out about the House of Hospitality. She had
been living down on the Bowery, paying 25 cents a night for a bed and, now
her money was all gone and she had no place to go. She was telling me
about her friend, who was also down and out, who went to take a room, or
a bed up in Harlem, was seduced by a young Spanish American, and threw
herself under a subway train a week later.

Her lips were trembling as she talked (it was only eight-thirty in the
morning), so I invited her out to have a cup of coffee.

\* \* \*

Last week a colored woman who has been staying up at the Municipal
Lodging House came in for a bite to eat. She looked in need of a shelter
where she could stay in bed and rest for a few days instead of having to
walk the streets from morning to night as the guests of the lodging
house have to do.

So that evening I went up to talk to the girls at the Teresa Joseph
co-operative to see if it would be all right with them to invite Mary to
stay up there. After all, I did not want to run the risk of submitting
her to insult on account of her skin -- nor did I expect too much of the
girls in the way of freedom from race prejudice, since I know very well
that Catholics of means and better education are not free themselves
from it.

I talked to the girls, reminding them how our Lord washed the feet of
his disciples the night before he suffered and died for us, and told
them how we all should serve each other, whether we are white, black or
yellow. The girls were perfectly happy to welcome the new guest, and it
was like a special birthday present for the paper to find this
continuing of the co-operative spirit among them.

Mary took the paper up to Harlem to distribute for us yesterday, and all
the other girls up at the house went to Mass or Communion to offer it up
for our special May Day work. Margaret, despite her condition, for she
is expecting a baby in six weeks, went on the subways yesterday, passing
out papers from Times Square to Astoria and from Manhattan to Brooklyn.
I was much touched and grateful at the help they all gave us.

An old Irishman of 73 came in this morning for his copies of the paper.
He lives down In the Bowery and has a thirty dollar a month pension,
from which he insisted on giving us a dollar. He also takes twenty-five
copies of the paper to send out to his friends, and every morning at
Mass, he says*,*he prays for us.

\* \* \*

A few weeks ago I went over to St. Zita's to see a sister there and the
woman who answered the door took it for granted that I came to beg for
shelter. The same morning I dropped into the armory or Fourteenth
street, where lunches are being served to unemployed women, and there
they again motioned me into the waiting room, thinking that I had come
for food. These incidents are significant. After all my heels are not
run down -- my clothes were neat -- I am sure I looked averagely
comfortable and well cared for--and yet it was taken for granted that
because I dropped into these places I needed help. It just shows how
many girls, and women, who to the average eye, look as though they came
from comfortable surroundings are really homeless and destitute.

You see them in the waiting rooms of all the department stores. To all
appearances they are waiting to meet their friends, to go on a shopping
tour -- to a matinee, or to a nicely served lunch in the store
restaurant. But in reality they are looking for work (you can see the
worn newspapers they leave behind with the help wanted page well
thumbed), and they have no place to go, no place to rest but in these
public places -- and no good hot lunch to look forward to. The stores
are thronged with women buying dainty underwear which they could easily
do without -- compacts for a dollar, when the cosmetics in the
five-and-ten are just as good -- and mingling with these protected women
and often indistinguishable from them, are these sad ones, these
desolate ones, with no homes, no jobs, and never enough food in their
stomachs.

"I often wonder what God**thinks of the scribes**and orators who thunder
terrors at poor women for their desperate attempts**at**contraception
and never *have*a word to say to the**Bank of England and the Treasury
which *have*so obviously chosen birth-restriction as the solution for
unemployment and are enforcing**this policy**on the poor by every
means**in their power. . . . Indeed, our domination by money lenders is
nowhere so disastrous, as**in the sphere of**marriage and family
life*.*The right**to marry is a human right like the right**to breathe
and eat -- equally the right to bring**up a family. The family is the
basic social unit, ordained as such by God Himself. Economic systems
must**be arranged to suit the**family, and not *the family to*economic
conditions. When Leo XIII**demanded the living wage it**was the family
wage he meant*.*All this is ordinary Catholic teaching*.*For bringing up
a family the first requisite is evidently an income. Under the savage
economics of the past two years the children of the**unemployed have
been allowed two shillings per week."

(Fr. Drinkwater in the *Sower*, a journal of Catholic education.)
