% Why Write About Strife and Violence?
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1934, 1, 2.

*Summary: Calls attention to the social crisis, class warfare, and
numerous strikes. Notes how Communists practice the corporal works of
mercy while lukewarm, comfortable, and indifferent Catholics turn their
backs on strikers and their families. (DDLW \#279).*

If our stories this month regarding the Weirton decision, the strike and
riot wave, and the threats of approaching general strikes are ominous in
tone; and if our friends would wish that we concentrated more on the joy
of the love of God and less on the class strife which prevails in
industry we remind them of the purpose of this paper The Catholic
Worker.

It is addressed to the worker, and what is of interest to them is the
condition of labor, and the attitude of the church in regard to it.

If we attempt with undue optimism to minimize the crisis, if we do not
recognize the crisis, if we do not recognize their plight, we are
forcing them to turn to sheets such as the Daily Worker which does take
cognizance of their condition. At the scene of every strike the Daily
Worker is sold, and the workers read it because it deals with their
problems. We, too, must deal with the problems which confront them, and
show the attitude and the recognition of the church of those problems.

Help the Workers
----------------

Those comfortable people too, who do not realize the unfairness of this
existing order, need to be told of existing conditions. They are too apt
to see things from the side of the employer, since the radio, the
newspapers, and public interest is usually on the side of wealth and
influence. If they cooperated with the worker instead of arranging
themselves on the side of the employer, justice would prevail.

We wish to arouse, too, those indifferent Catholics to the crying need
of the day -- the need of a return to the spirit of Franciscan poverty
and charity.

Father Cuthbert
---------------

of England in a pamphlet entitled *St. Francis and you,* published in
1905, wrote: St. Francis laid the foundation of a new social order of
things within the church. This was his special work, and the work of his
order -- to induce Christian society to live by Christian principles; to
be Christians in very deed as well as by profession. . . St. Francis. .
. by laying upon his Tertiaries the precept never to bear arms except in
defense of the Church, struck a fatal blow at the entire (feudal)
system. Today then, Catholics have need to be strong and perfect
Christians, willing to sacrifice themselves -- their ease and their
personal interests, their prejudices and smaller ideals -- to the larger
interest of winning the modern world to Christ and His Church; men who
will not shrink from battle, nor fear hardship and toil. This is a time
when the Church needs apostles to convert the new world of thought and
action that has sprung up in these days; and she calls upon her children
to do their part, each according to his ability and opportunity, in the
work that lies before her.

These words are as true now as they were in 1905. We call upon the
comfortable people to recognize and to fight the industrial evils that
are dragging the people down and making them in their blind and perverse
human hopelessness to turn from their Mother the Church.

No Help from Red Cross
----------------------

We recall to our comfortable readers, to whom these tales of strike and
riot are something outside their ken, that the Red Cross has in many
cases refused to give help to starving women and children when a strike
was on. That it was the Communists who collected food and clothes for
the families of miners waging their industrial battles down in Kentucky,
for the families of the textile strikers in North Carolina.

Again major strikes threaten, steel strikes, cotton textile strikes,
longshoremen strikes, truck drivers strikes, and many of these strikes
are taking place now.

Is it to be left to the Communists to succor the oppressed, to fight for
the unemployed, to collect funds for hungry women and children? It is
true that in a big city like New York relief is given to many who do not
need it and that graft is rampant. But that does not mean that in
industrial sections the people are being properly cared for, and fed.
Statistics show that the children of miners in unorganized sections
never knew what it was to drink milk, never saw an orange. We know of a
Communist child who collected money from among her school friends to add
to the relief fund for these children.

To Win the Worker
-----------------

To feed the hungry, clothe the naked, shelter the shelterless -- these
corporal works of mercy are too often being done by the opposition, and
to what purpose? To win to the banners of communism the workers and
their children.

These workers do not realize those words of St. Paul, "If I should
distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and if I should deliver my
body to be burned and have not charity (the love of God) it profiteth me
nothing."

Most Catholics speak of Communists with the bated breath of horror. And
yet those poor unfortunate ones who have not the faith to guide them are
apt to stand more chance in the eyes of God than those indifferent
Catholics who stand by and do nothing for "the least of them" of whom
Christ spoke.
