% Day After Day - September 1934
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1934, 3, 7.

*Summary: A review of summer activities including a children's party
held in honor of the Feast of the Assumption, passing out literature,
answering inquiries, and the various summer centers hosting lectures.
Describes a feisty infant whose antics inspired Peter Maurin to recite
the principles of Catholic Action to this "potential recruit." Defends
*The Catholic Worker's* reaction to Rockerfeller's recent donations to
Catholic Charities in light of violence in Ludlow, Colorado. (DDLW
\#281).*

"Be sure and put it in the paper that we had a party again this year,"
the kids of the house said on the Feast of the Assumption. And a swell
party it was, even better than last year because there were four extra
kids from the Guido family, who moved in next door during the year.
There was Sara and Sammie, and Johnnie and little Mary, who calls
herself Meddy; and there was Freddy Rubino, who drew such a lovely
picture of a little boy praying (he was quite uplifted), which we
published a few months ago; and there was Sonny and Ethel, and this year
Ethel was too big to wear a veil; and there was Teresa, who has grown
almost a foot and is so brown she looks like Freddy's sister.

The statue of the Blessed Virgin which came from Rome and is said to
have been blessed by the Holy Father was set out in the midst of the
geraniums, petunias and spider plants, and vigil lights and bouquets
surrounded her and she looked most happy beaming over the fiesta. It was
a gala day and the party continued until untold sparklers and candles
had been burned and everybody stayed up until ten-thirty in true fiesta
spirit.

## \*\*\*

The Catholic Worker Propaganda Committee of young people from Cathedral
College, Columbia, City College, Long Island College and any number of
other places gathered to distribute literature--6,000 copies of The
Catholic Worker and 4,000 leaflets throughout the city, and the office
was crowded all day with visitors and workers.

## \*\*\*

It has been a lively and pleasant summer, and although we skipped an
issue because we didn't have enough money to print, the work continued
apace, and more and more inquiries came in by mail and in person. When
we weren't answering letters we were answering questions from people who
flock to the office.

## \*\*\*

One of the editors visited Stamford to speak on "The Quest for Social
Justice" and the work being done there at that summer center is
inspiring. A tremendous amount of research and outlining has been done
for study club work, and there were meetings up there every afternoon of
groups to study different phases of Catholic Action and to learn how to
lead groups in their home parishes. Father Dasey and Dr. Blanche M.
Kelly were ably assisted by the Baroness de Hueck of Toronto, who came
there to study the formation of study clubs and worked at one-week,
two-week, and six-week outlines of courses to be followed.

The significance of the work being done at Stamford can be appreciated
when one realizes how dear to the heart of the Holy Father is this work.
The Apostolic Delegate, too, stresses it as one of the great needs of
the day.

## \*\*\*

Another visit was made to Rhode Island to another Catholic summer
community where a talk was given to a group of Catholics interested in
social justice. Bishop Hafey of North Carolina was present at the
meeting and gave the group his blessing. He promises to drop in to The
Catholic Worker office when he is in New York to meet the group of
Fifteenth Street workers.

## \*\*\*

One of the girls of the House of Hospitality had a baby this summer up
at Bellevue Hospital, and at this moment baby Barbara is out in the back
yard sunning herself in her carriage--all dressed up in a bonnet with
ruffles like a halo. Margaret, her mother, is preparing supper and the
baby's bottle is warming on the stove. She eats like a little pig, her
tiny jaws working busily. And as she eats she glares at you with her
blue eyes which are turning brown, as though to say, "Just you try to
take my bottle away from me." For seven weeks old she is very smart and
has already discovered her fists and looks at them in a most cock-eyed
way. She doubles them up as though she were preparing for class war, so
we get Peter to recite an essay to her now and then about Catholic
Action and Bolshevik action, just to start inculcating the true spirit
while she's young.

## \*\*\*

Several people have condemned us for our article on Rockefeller and his
donation to Catholic Charities, and one opponent wrote an article about
how the cowardly workers, holding their women and children in front of
them, were invading property owned and operated by Mr. Rockefeller to
burn and destroy what they could reach. Our opponent says that the
"article in The Catholic Worker cannot be too severely condemned." We
went up to the public library, and looking into the files, found there
complete stories of the Ludlow murders in forty magazines and in all the
newspapers; and the attack occurred on the property of the miners
themselves, rented by the union to house the workers in tents since they
could no longer live on company property. *The Literary Digest* had
pictures of Ludlow and the men, women and children, and a complete
account of the atrocity. It is too bad our antagonists do not inform
themselves on the subject before they take the lying statements of
enemies of God and His poor as truth.
