% Day After Day - March 1935
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1935, 3.

*Summary: Thoughts on Molly Maguires, labor organizing, a visit to the
Cathedral in Toronto, the activities of young Communists, and the work
of Catherine de Hueck. (DDLW \#286).*

At a friend's house this evening we met the grandchild of a
saloon-keeper who had been hanged as a Molly Maguire in the days when
unionization in the coal fields was just beginning down in Pennsylvania.
Not long ago we read an article in the Herald Tribune magazine section
which told how the U.S. Bureau of Mines had worked to protect the lives
of miners by inspections and enforcing safety laws and the installation
of safety devices. There was not a word in that article of the work the
Molly Maguires did in protesting against hazardous working conditions,
long hours, child labor and such wages that the textile industries grew
up in mine regions to exploit the labor of the women and girls of miners
who had to go to work because the men of the family were not paid enough
to support them.

The Molly Maguires took to violence, and thus brought discredit on the
labor movement. But woe to those men who drove them to violence. Those
mine owners themselves are guilty in the sight of God for the murders
perpetrated by the miners in the vicious fight for bare subsistence.

All that the public generally hears about these early labor troubles is
what he reads in dime novels about the Pinkerton boys and how they broke
up the organization.

## \*\*\*

We went up to Toronto this month on the invitation of Dr. Muckle, rector
of the Cathedral, and spent a very enjoyable week. In illustrations of
the idea of individual responsibility, he told me a story of a tinsmith
working ten hours a day for \$44 a month, who sent money to different
organizations to further their work, and gave all his spare time to his
work as lay apostle.

The archbishop's palace in Toronto is a well-used place. We went there
for dinner one night, and it is a good, bare place, anything but
luxurious, with many rooms given over to meetings, discussion groups,
workers' clubs, and offices. There was even a working-girls' club, where
the young women were having a St. Valentine's Day party, cooking in the
kitchen, which was attached to the clubrooms, and dancing to a radio
afterward.

## \*\*\*

Speaking of church suppers, one of our young Communist relatives came in
to see us the other day and talked of the unit dinner being given,
cooked by the Ladies' Auxiliary. Also, together with all other members
of the Communist party, he had been commissioned to sell chances on a
five-dollar gold piece--the chance book looked dearly familiar. Also he
had a book of stamps to be sold for the underground fund the Communist
party is gathering together with the expectation that in the near future
the party will be suppressed. All the younger members of the party look
upon this prospect with joy. To work underground--to carry on secret
propaganda and publishing and distributing "underground"--what fun! Even
selling chances becomes an exciting adventure. We are very much opposed
to giving them all this pleasure.

## \*\*\*

Friendship House, where we visited in Toronto, is a place much like our
own offices here in New York. The atmosphere is very much the same,
though their place is cleaner and quieter. The group which is running
the place under the direction of Catherine de Hueck is engaged in
propaganda activities among the children and workers in one of the
poorest districts of Toronto, bringing the thought of the church to
those who up to the present time have only been reached by Communists.

There are two connected houses which have been converted into reading
rooms and dining rooms, and upstairs on one side there is a hospice for
men and on the other for women. Plans are under way to open another
house for boys, putting it under the protection of St. John Bosco. The
other two houses are called St. Joseph's house and St. Teresa's house.

Right now mimeographed leaflets like those put out by THE CATHOLIC
WORKER are being distributed throughout the city.

This very active group of workers has been distributing two thousand
copies of THE CATHOLIC WORKER every month, but now the order has been
increased to four thousand.
