% Day After Day - May 1935
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1935, 3, 7.

*Summary: Describes house cleaning in preparation for Easter. Catholic
workers promulgated Catholic social principles in leaflets and speaking
in Union Square at a Communist rally. Notes the work of priests with men
on the bowery. (DDLW \#288).*

Today everyone is busy making the house clean for Easter. Larry Doyle
and Walter Livermore have just finished washing all the windows on the
first two floors and it is a bright sunshiny day for such work. Walter
works nights in a brewery, but such is his energy that he gives his
mornings to the Catholic Worker and picketing, distributing literature,
doing up and delivering bundles, exhorting Newman clubs--nothing is too
much for him. Window washing wasn't enough this morning, so he went on
to mop up the office floor.

Teresa is home from school for her Easter vacation and she found her
manual toil in bedmaking, one of the arts she has learned in school. You
take off and fold up all the covers before you go to mass; turn up the
mattress and hang up the clothes. Then on your return you begin from the
bottom and make the bed completely--a big job for a very little girl.
She can beat up omelets too (she's especially enthusiastic if they are
jam omelets), but she's better at eating them.

The girls in the House of Hospitality will clean the rest of the house
tomorrow--you never need to ask them to do anything. They take matters
into their own hands and look around for work to do.

Just to add to the spirit of preparation for festivity, a friend brought
in a huge spray of shad bush in blossom and it flaunts itself in front
of a wall decoration made in carpet by one of our staff--a beautiful
design of the Blessed Virgin and Child.

## \*\*\*

News of the month in the way of Catholic Worker street activities. A
Communist demonstration being held in front of Home Relief headquarters
in an Italian neighborhood, we got out a leaflet addressed to police.
Home Relief workers and unemployed alike, bearing quotations from the
early fathers and the Popes as to the distribution of created goods, and
joining the unemployed in their appeal for more adequate food and
clothing.

"The distribution of created goods must be brought into conformity with
the demands of the common good and social justice," the Holy Father has
written, "for every sincere observer is conscious that the vast
differences between the few who hold excessive wealth and the many who
live in destitution constitute a grave evil in modern society."

St. Gregory said that "when we distribute to the poor what they need, we
are not giving what belongs to us, we merely pay back their own. We are
paying a debt of justice, rather than fulfilling a work of mercy."

With these reminders we are sure that social workers and home relief
officials will be more conscious of the attitude of meekness and love
they should maintain in dealing with the poor who come to them.

And who knows but that this reminder reaching the poor and rebellious
who gather at these demonstrations may not bring them closer to the
Church who ever has the needs of her poor at heart.

## \*\*\*

One Saturday afternoon, during the latter part of last month, Dorothy
Weston made her first appearance on a soap box in Union Square. It was
not really a soap box but a step ladder surmounted by an American flag,
and from this pitch Communists, the National Student Federation, also
Communists, A. F. of L., Office Workers' Union and various others were
represented.

On account of the Catholic Worker participation in the Ohrbach strike we
had been invited to speak at the demonstration being held and after
consulting a priest on the advisability of appearing on a platform with
Communists, we were advised to go ahead.

Accompanied by a group of Catholic Workers, Dorothy Weston took the
stand and gave a brief and forceful talk on the principles of social
justice as upheld by the popes and the bishops in their statement on the
present crisis.

In spite of traffic noises which included a few fire engines, Dr. Weston
was able to make herself heard and was listened to with interest.

Realizing the necessity of bringing Christian social teachings to the
man in the street, we wish to call attention to the story, SPEAKERS
WANTED, in this issue of the paper.

## \*\*\*

The Catholic Worker is penetrating farther and farther in the
wildernesses of the world.

Last month a visitor came to us from the missions of Africa where he had
been living in a mud hut with a tin roof for the last four years. This
Irish missionary priest has been laboring among 50,000 natives of
Nigeria where the temperature is 120 in the shade.

He asks us to send him the paper when he goes back to his labors next
fall.

Last month we visited the Holy Name Mission on the Bowery where 1,200
men are cared for by Father Rafter and Father O'Connor.

"There are 15,000 men on the Bowery," Father Rafter said. "We've been
working with them for the last 22 years. We saved for a long time,
trying to get a building fund together, but the depression has exhausted
that long since and the building has to be deferred."

Evidently Father Rafter believes and follows out the teaching of Bossuet
that the Church's first concern are the immediate needs of the poor.

"We have five masses on Sunday morning," he said, "and they are all
packed. These men would not go elsewhere. They are at home here with
us."

And we thought to ourselves as we went through the shabby old building,
what a gigantic task these priests of God have always with them, and
with what cheer they undertake it each day, using what means they have
at hand to work with.

Anyone who says that city agencies are taking care of all the poor and
that he cannot find any work to do ought to go see Father Rafter and see
what cooperation he can give him in the way of gathering clothes for the
poor, for instance.

One of our Catholic Workers found something that he could do in playing
the organ at evening services three nights a week. He is an invalid
himself, but he's given his time and his strength willingly and with
joy.
