% Day After Day - July-August 1935
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1935, 2.

*Summary: Writes of how people are treated poorly at the Home Relief
office. Describes a visit to the garden commune on Staten Island, swims,
walks, the inviting smells of plants, and visiting children from Harlem.
(DDLW \#291).*

A day so wet and heavy that one could scarcely breathe. No sun, but the
air felt hot as a blanket, hanging close over the city, and people
walked around languidly, scarcely able to move with the oppression that
was upon them.

Down to the Houston Street Home Relief Bureau with some friends who are
on Home Relief and who are registering for work relief, and there
marveled at the two policemen and five husky young men hanging around
the entrance. Job holders they are, sneering at those who come for help.
"A strong-arm squad," a member of the unemployed union told us, "to keep
delegations out of the bureau. We were down last week, presenting a
petition, and I got a black eye as a result. We come to ask for jobs,
and all we get is kicks and curses."

A woman with a baby in her arms, probably not more than a few weeks old,
came to ask why her rent had not been paid. She was refused admittance
and told to leave her baby at home next time, with her husband, perhaps.

She did not speak English very well, but she made the strong-arm squad
understand that "she had no husband."

And where did the baby come from, they jeered as she was forced to
leave.

## \*\*\*

Down to Staten Island in the afternoon to see how the family there were
getting along. Bernard and Rudy, two little boys, six and eight, from
the Harlem classes, and a former Jewish rabbi, homeless because of his
conversion, are our latest guests there.

There was time for a swim before supper and the water was oily calm,
with the sky hanging so low over it that you could almost reach up and
touch it with your hands. We all crouched in the water, digging for
small hardshell clams with our hands, and found a dozen. Teresa was best
at it.

After supper the atmosphere was a little brighter, with the rays of the
sun stealing out from under the heavy curtain of clouds and just a
suggestion of freshness in the air. So the children and Stanley and I
went for a walk, arriving back in the dusk, the children stumbling not
only with fatigue but because they insisted on walking with their faces
uplifted to the moon.

## \*\*\*

Another morning, hot and heavy, and with the first rays of the sun the
cicadas begin their triumphant song. Teresa woke me to tell me they were
the first of the year and it was pleasant to lie there in bed and listen
to the loud crescendo rising to a climax and dying out again drowsily.

The children played out under the apple trees after breakfast, waiting
for the grownups to be ready for a swim while the tide was high.

Midweek as it was, the beach was deserted and it was refreshing to swim
out into the calm bay and then float, bathed in both sea, sky and sun,
and silence, too, save for the happy calls of the children as they
played with the little waves that foamed up on the beach.

## \*\*\*

The garden progresses and for the last week, with the heavy rains, there
had been no need to water it. We are beginning to study sprays and the
labels which proclaim their efficacy for aphids, thrips and leaf
hoppers, Mexican bean beetles, black fly, soft scale and midge. We have
been eating the lettuce, onions, radishes and a few string beans and
soon the tomatoes will be ready. One of the best smells in the world is
the smell of tomato plants, or perhaps the wet earth after a rain, or
honeysuckle or privet hedge in blossom. The world is full of good smells
down here after the heavy smells of the city and crowded humans. Even
the poison ivy we have discovered has a delicious odor when it is
blossoming. So there is at least one good contribution from that
venomous weed which has caused at least two of our workers to swell and
burn and itch through sleepless nights.

## \*\*\*

The only trouble with the garden commune is that one cannot be there all
the time. There are a dozen permanent residents, and all the rest go and
come to fulfill their duties in town as well as out. And it is always
such a wrench to put on shoes and stockings and toil the hot long way up
to the station and take the train into the city.

## \*\*\*

Bernard has just come in with another bouquet for his mother. The two
children pick daily bouquets which are gathered with loving care and
then forgotten--wild carrot, wild onion, bay leaves, sassafras twigs,
buttercups and daisies, Queen Anne's lace, clovers and the persisting
honeysuckle.

From the open window by my side as I write, the smell of new cut grass
is coming in from the field by the side of the house where Stanley is
cutting. He has left the city streets and his apostolate of paper
selling, has Stanley, and has become the guardian of the two small,
colored boys for the week.

Today five little girls came down--Dorothy and Hattie, Louise, Bernice
and Elinor. They, too, are Harlem children, and they don't need anyone
to watch them, they said, because Dorothy is twelve and quite used to
being guardian to three or four younger than herself.

The work in town calls, and one must go back and face evictions, court
cases, hospital patients to visit, callers to see at the office and
folders of letters which must be answered
