% Day After Day - January 1937
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1937, 4, 6.

*Summary: Details about caring for workers during the seamens'
strike--the need for large amounts of food, space to sleep, illness,
high rent, and the threat of violence. Says unions need a supernatural
outlook for "without a fatherhood of God, there can be no brotherhood of
man." (DDLW \#314).*

For the last month THE CATHOLIC WORKER has occupied a large store at 181
Tenth Avenue, just around the corner from the headquarters of the
striking seamen. From the first day the place has been thronged from 8
in the morning until midnight. Joe Hughes, one of the seamen who has for
the last eight months been one of the Catholic Workers, both at Mott
Street and the farm, is in charge, together with Bill Callahan, John
Cort, Joe Galleo and Bill Evans have come to the rescue of our coffee
squad and helped keep the three five-gallon pots boiling.

Right now we are using 125 loaves of bread a day, fifty pounds each of
peanut butter, apple butter and cottage cheese, and we can't stop to
count the pounds of coffee, sugar, and milk. St. Joseph is taking charge
of the payment of bills to the Federal Co-operative, which is working
night and day with us and begging on the side to keep us going.

One day a box of dried prunes came in, and having no extra burner on our
gas stove, we put them out as they were and they went fast. For two
months the men have been living on nothing but stew, and not much of it
at that. They are worn with the long strike, but their courage is
undiminished. They are prepared to stick it out for the winter, and we
are prepared to stick it out with them. Not prepared with money, of
course. Our grocery bill mounts gigantically, with 800 to l,000 men to
feed, but we always have the assurance that St. Joseph is our almoner.
It is up to him.


Strategy Finance
----

Frank Jones is the member of the Strike Strategy Committee in charge of
finance, and he came over to our branch on Tenth Avenue to be
interviewed on how the strike is financed and how much it costs. He is a
young fellow, very serious and burdened with the care of the thousands
of seamen who need to be housed and fed.

"During November it cost \$550 a day," he said, "and I hate to tell you
our deficit. We don't like to make it public because it disheartens the
men. The other night at the Madison Square Garden meeting the ticket
sales amounted to \$l,200 and the collection \$2,200. Only a third of
those attending paid admissions. The unemployed and strikers got in
free. There was about \$600 in pledges, and we don't count those until
we've collected them.

"We make some money on the sale of the Pilot, the men who are out on the
street bringing in from 60 cents to \$6 a day.

"I don't know what the food costs or how they get it. Somebody else has
charge of that. We put up about 200 men down in the neighborhood at
South Street at 20 cents a night, 400 up around headquarters here, 100
in Harlem and 200 in Greenpoint. A lot of the men are staying with
friends, or have some money left from their pay, although they donated
to the strike fund as they came off ship."

Need Money
----

Since the strikers are in revolt against the corrupt union leaders who
hold the money the men have been paying in for dues for years, the
Strike Strategy Committee is always faced by a money shortage.

The rent of the headquarters on Eleventh Avenue, near 23d Street, comes
to \$85 a month, although they used to pay \$50. Dominick Curzio is the
agent for the building, and just last month he served a dispossess
notice on the strategy committee. They had to pay \$300 down and sign a
lease agreeing to pay \$85 a month hereafter, making all repairs
themselves. When they were arranging the details of the lease, Dominick
remarked that his lawyer was also Joseph P. Ryan's lawyer.

A Sick Guest
----

The days continue warm, flu weather, everybody calls it, and our doors
at Tenth Avenue stand open a good part of the day. The hall is crowded
all the time, all the benches occupied and many standing.

One fellow I noticed sleeping with his head on the long table in the
middle of the room most of the afternoon. Later he came up to get a cup
of coffee at the stand by the kitchen door and said he had a chill.Â  I
noticed that his eyes were bleary and that he looked feverish, and
recommended that he sleep on one of the two beds in the back room where
Bill and Joe are sleeping now (their beds are already taken at Mott
Street ).

One of the seamen recommended eucalyptus oil on sugar and went out to
get some, and we dosed him with that, but he continued to lie there,
shivering under heavy quilts and coughing rackingly.

I got a thermometer later and took his temperature and it was one
hundred and three. The only place he had to stay was a 20-cent lodging
house in the neighborhood, so thinking a hospital the best place for
him, I called a taxi and took him down to St. Vincent's.

Discussions
----

All day the place is packed, the men coming and going, on and off watch,
and they sit around for hours at a time too, reading the Catholic
magazines, papers and pamphlets that we have around the place. Many of
the books we have on hand have been borrowed, and we need more
literature on social questions. All the copies of the encyclicals which
we had on hand have been taken and tomorrow we'll have to order a
hundred more. Groups get together to discuss not only the strike, the
probabilities of winning it, but all the questions of nationalism, war,
pacifism, economics, the machine and unemployment, and again and again
the question of the faith is brought up, and how, without a supernatural
outlook, unions cannot help but fail, how, without a fatherhood of God,
there can be no brotherhood of man.

We are appealing to our readers not only for spiritual sustenance for
these men in the way of books, but also for food in the shape of bread
and jam and peanut butter and apple butter, or any such spread. We are
sure our readers around New York have jars of preserves they could spare
for these men who are going on short rations in a fight to achieve
better conditions of labor for themselves and their brothers.

Another Fallen
----

News was just brought in of a young fellow on the picket line, ailing
for days, who collapsed on the line and had to be taken over to
Bellevue, where they found he had pneumonia. . . . It is eleven o'clock
at night as I write this, and there are still about a score hanging
around the hall, which Bill is trying to sweep up. Word was just brought
in that a squad of terrorists patrolling the waterfront, the same as
those who, with the assistance of guns, leaped on the running board of
trucks this morning and forced the truck drivers to drive through the
picket lines to the piers, is on the loose in the neighborhood. Six of
the strikers were beaten up tonight with clubs. One of them has a broken
shoulder. . . Warning was brought from headquarters that they were
liable to come in and break our place up. Such are the usual tactics in
labor warfare. The testimony of the La Follette Committee has brought
this out plainly. And yet, whenever there is violence. it is usually
laid at the workers' door.
