% Day After Day - February 1937
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1937, 4.

*Summary: A colorful account of a winter morning at the Easton
farm--warm fires and cold bedrooms, making butter, the frolics of Bessie
the three month old calf. Speaks of guest rooms, hospitality, starting a
Catholic lending library, and reading about cooperatives. (DDLW \#316).*

The January sun is pouring into the kitchen and dining room of the farm.
The temperature is thirty-- yesterday it was twelve at this time in the
morning, and the house is perfectly comfortable with wood fires going in
the two rooms. The rest of the house is of course like an ice box. We
take hot bricks to bed at night. It is one of the thrills of a life time
to feel one's warmth gradually permeating the icy sheets and one's
breath making a corner warm for one's nose. A pleasure the inhabitants
of steam-heated apartments can never know. A cup of hot coffee never
tastes so good as when coming out of an ice cold room into a warm
kitchen.

An interruption to go out in the kitchen and admire the butter. Rosie is
giving about nineteen quarts of milk a day now and there is buttermaking
every other day. This morning it took only twenty minutes to churn and I
just finished sampling the bits off the wooden paddles of the churn.
There are two quarts of butter milk which will be used for pudding and
biscuits today.


Most Beautiful
--------

Bessie will be three months old the 10th of February and she is still
the most beautiful thing on the farm. (The O'Donnells have not yet
brought their six weeks old baby Martin up here.) Bessie must weigh
about 150 pounds by now, and it is the most graceful 150 pounds you ever
saw. John Filliger and I took her out for a walk this morning and it is
an adventure. First you have to see that Rosie is properly secured in
her stall. Once when her offspring was out she broke the rope which
secured her, knocked down the barn door and with cries of anguish rushed
up the hill after John and the calf. She leaped and kicked, and tossed
her head and expressing her fears as to her young one's safety. She
doesn't want to lose this, her latest born.

This morning she mooed like a fog horn a few times as we took Bessie out
with a chain about her neck, but otherwise she was quiet. Bessie has
sprouting horns now and a set of teeth, and she is weaned, but passing
through Rosie's stall, she made a dive for her. A little more breakfast
wouldn't come amiss, she indicated. But she's off milk altogether now,
so we heartlessly dragged her away and out into the fields around the
house.

Appreciative Sniffers
--------
It was a good thing it was not icy out. Snorting with enjoyment, she
leaped and then started to run, pulling at the chain which John had
wrapped around his hand. They raced down the hill together almost to the
kitchen door, and then she pulled up, prancing. Her small hoofs sounded
hollow on the frozen ground and she danced a few steps gracefully,
tossing her head. The dogs, Paprika and Kaiser, barked with excitement,
not wanting to be out of anything that goes on.

Bessie likes the small world she has come into and went around sniffing
appreciatively at the woodpile, the table under the trees where the
washing up is done, and she left the print of her wet nose on every rock
and log. The ax and saw she smelt of and tossed her head at them. Then
she was off again, this time up the hill, bounding madly in the cold
sweet air. She is just as clean and white as when she was born and we
are indeed proud of her.

The four black pigs are growing stout and lusty. When John goes out to
pour the skim milk into their trough they dive madly into it, feet and
all. One of them is Teresa's, the present of Mr. Breen, purchased with a
check from a *Commonweal* review. She can't tell the pigs apart,
however, and each time she comes to the farm on a holiday she has to
pick one out all over again. "It's the one with the straight tail," she
will say, and then the unaccomodating pig curls his tail up scornfully.

Guest Rooms
--------
Part of the house of hospitality has moved down to Easton. As we have
explained before, our idea of hospitality means that everyone with a
home should have a guest room. We have pointed out before how two women
who help us with the paper and who are interested in our ideals, have
moved into tenement apartments down at Mott Street and take in those in
need of hospitality in their spare rooms. One of the striking
stewardesses is staying in one apartment, and another woman temporarily
out of employment is staying with our friend in the other.

Loretta O'Donnell has two of the girls from the House of Hospitality
with her, and during the day they work over in the Easton office on
South Fourth Street, where the business office now is. It is a big
family now, what with two babies, and two guests whom we cannot really
consider guests, since they have become part of our community during
these past two years.


A Good Book
--------
Stanley and Dan occupy the rooms in back of the store, and there they
feed anyone who happens to come along. The store is big enough for
meetings during the summer months when visitors abound, and we aim to
start a Catholic circulating library as soon as we have money to build
shelves to receive the books which are already stacked on tables in the
store. All the clerical work is done there, and Stanley is building up
interest in the paper by his distribution about town. It is a
headquarters such as our friends have started in Boston, Chicago, St.
Louis, etc.

Lying on the couch while the chestnut logs snapped warmly in the big
stove, I read Kagawa's "Brotherhood Economics," which is one of the best
and simplest accounts of the cooperative movement I have come across.
Peter says he links up the idea of communitarianism and cooperatives
very well, and I enjoyed reading his brief account of the mutual aid
movement among the early Christians and communities of monks. It is a
short book, and a simple book, surveying economics from an entirely
fresh angle. We recommend it to our readers.
