% Day After Day - June 1937
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1937, 4, 6, 7.

*Summary: Describes parish life in a South Side Chicago slum, the
beautiful liturgy in a St. Louis, Missouri, convent. Speaks to workers,
white and colored, and lauds the teaching and hospital work of a 75 year
old priest, Fr. John Lyons. (DDLW \#322).*

I must keep a more careful record of places and persons even if it means
sitting up in bed writing after an 18-hour day.

For instance, there is in this place so many details of which I do not
want to forget but will unless I write them down.

It is the first rectory I've ever stayed at and it is a great privilege
to be here. The door bell rings day and night, its parlors are cluttered
up with people, everyone works from dawn till way after dark, and
everyone is very happy.

We are on the South Side in an uneven neighborhood which has good and
bad houses, but mostly slums. Around on Michigan Avenue the houses are
beautiful, but across the street are some little houses so awful that it
is hard to believe temples of the Holy Ghost are housed there.

Fr. Drescher, the pastor here, pointed out one house which some children
had pushed over on themselves, and he had waited hours while the fire
department extricated them, to baptize them. Neither child was hurt
badly, strangely enough.

Father and I were walking around the neighborhood looking for a little
house for another branch of the Catholic Worker for his side of town.

"I cried when I got home that day," he said. "I don't know what was the
matter with me. I never do that."

It is a joy to be with such priests as Father Drescher. He and Father
Luis, Father Jansen and Father Boerding are all so gay. Father Drescher
is the pastor but he is like an older brother. They are free and happy
with one another.

He used to be a missionary in the Philippines and as we sit over a good
breakfast of liver sausage and toast and fruit and coffee he tells us of
living conditions there.

"At first we were allowed three dollars a month to live on. All we had
were rice and leaves most of the time.

"Later, when I had three sisters come out for teaching we were allowed
ten dollars. You couldn't buy anything. Money wasn't much good. When
some of our kind friends sent us clothes, we could exchange them for
food, fish and chickens. Sometimes we had grasshoppers, locusts they
were, cooked, first in salt and water, and then served with a little
vinegar and lard. They were delicious. We liked it. They eat dogs there,
too, and say they are very good but I never ate any. We never had any
bread until I began to bake some. We just had rice, and to keep our
teeth in chewing habit, we had water buffalo meat. Fresh it was tough,
but dried it was worse. And sugar cane to chew on, too. Between the meat
and the grasshoppers, I preferred the grasshoppers.

Making Bread
---

"My bread was very good. We used a five gallon can as the oven, putting
the coals and charcoal in the bottom and making an oven on top. We put
the bread in an empty sardine tin. I sent some to the sisters and they
said it was better than theirs. But I didn't have much time for
gardening or baking. I had to go on horseback and on rafts, in all
directions, to reach my people.

"During the war about 28 of us Germans were arrested and shipped back to
the United States--I don't know what for. All of us were confined to a
fo'castle (there were six priests among us) and it was terribly hot.
When they shut off the ventilating system to rest the machinery some of
them fainted. There we were for weeks. We had beans 78 times. Everybody
got thin but the priests and they got fat. Yes, it was a hard life."

The house here is big and the pastor gave me his room because it is the
only one with a private bath. The windows look out on a gnarled
ailanthus tree, which grows so well in city back yards. There are some
shrubs in the tiny back yard but the grass is trampled down by the
police dog and the puppy, a mongrel called Valentine, whom Father says
Martin de Porres sent him for a pet. The police dog is a watch dog, not
a pet, but the little cur wags his whole hind end and is a friend of
all. I can see why Father never ate dog meat.

The rooms are large, but the furniture is very poor and the rugs worn
down to the nap. When they need any "new" furniture they go buy it at
the Catholic Salvage Bureau around the corner. Fortunately for them
there are no ill advised though loving parishioners to smother them in
gifts such as oriental rugs.

May Day
---

The cooking is good and we like to go out to the kitchen where Mrs.
Lorenz holds sway. She comes from Louisiana and has two daughters who
are nuns. On Sunday nights, or when we come in late, we meet down there
because we love kitchens, priests and all of us.

The procession for May Day was a happy occasion in the church across the
street. The church was filled with flowers, and all the little girls and
boys who had made their first Communion that morning and all the school
children filled the church. And before the statue of the Sorrowful
Mother there was a big pot of roses, bought for her by a Negro girl who
had been homeless one time last winter but now had a job and could
afford to pay for roses out of her eight dollars a week salary! May Our
Lord and the Blessed Mother bless her!

Blooms in the City
---

Two members of the Catholic Worker who are leaders of the South Side
branch are working here with Father Drescher in the parish, two
Elizabeths, and we have enjoyed being together these few weeks.

While we were looking for a place this afternoon we passed little
ramshackle frame houses all bent and reeling, and the front yards were
planted with lettuce, radishes, golden glow and iris, and even some rows
of corn. On one street, here in the heart of the slums there was an
apple tree in bloom and a parrot out in a bush in the front yard. Wish
we could find a place on that street, but there is great difficulty in
finding any place around here, it is so congested with several families
and sometimes dozens of families living in one house. Many of the worst
places have been torn down and there is no new housing to take their
place.

St. Louis
---

Three of us from St. Louis started out before five one morning (it was
the octave of the Ascension) to go to the Convent of the Precious Blood
at O'Fallon, Missouri, for High Mass at six. We had time to recite Lauds
as we sped along at sixty miles an hour, and the nuns, novices,
postulants and aspirants were just starting Prime when we arrived.

In the chapel, surrounded by noble trees and lawns, were the robed
women, and the beauty within completed the beauty without. I have never
heard Mass sung so, with such clear, pure and hearty singing, not the
thin, attenuated singing one is accustomed to associate with women's
voices and Gregorian.

Liturgy
---

Purity was a positive virtue there in that chapel. There was strength,
joy and love strong as death there.

And I thought as I listened that if Mass were offered up in only one
place in the world, as Thomas a Kempis suggested, so that all the
workers would flock to assist, it would be offered with just such beauty
and glory.

I thought too, how there at this liturgical center of America they had
made most truly the Mass the crown of the day. The morning took its
rightful place, its emphasis. Matins, Lauds, Prime, led up to Mass
followed by Terce and Sext, and then the great work of the day was
done,--surely as perfectly as it is ever done in this imperfect world.
The rest of the day is relatively unimportant and declines to nightfall
when God's creatures sleep.

I thought of the city, of the world, and how life begins at dusk, and I
realized as never before that the life of the Mystical Body is a
glorious day.

Breakfast
---

Fr. Hellriegel was our host at breakfast and it was a hearty meal as it
should be after such hearty singing. We sat long at the table.

Fr. Hellriegel, the chaplain of the Convent, is a mountain of strength
and of energy and has that happiness of one who does well what God wants
him to do.

After being up since four thirty, we ate heartily of bacon and eggs,
homemade bread and butter, and there were sausages, cheese and green
topped onions on the table, of which Father ate ten before I could get
the plate and take half a dozen myself.

Speaking to the nuns was a great pleasure and they are all going to pray
for the Catholic Worker. Their powerhouse there supplies us with the
energy we need for our work.

The students at the high school were farmers' sons and daughters and it
was good to talk to them too. We will have there one more C.W. group I
hope.

Speaking
---

So many places covered this trip and so many different audiences. In St.
Louis I spoke before our own group twice, before several High Schools;
before one group of workers in an enameling plant and before 600 steel
workers.

The last crowd were just organized by the C.I.O. in Granite City,
Illinois, and, though the town allows no negroes after dark, white and
colored were in the same hall, in the same union; this is something the
C.I.O. has achieved which the A. F. of L. failed in.

(We stopped at a coffee shop in St. Louis with a colored member of our
group and the A. F. of L. waitress said it was a clause in the contract
that she couldn't serve colored. Don Gallagher, one of our own, waited
on us instead.)

Father Lyons
---

We picked up Father John LyonsÂ  at the rectory of St. Louis one
afternoon and went with him to General Hospital number 2 where the
colored of St. Louis are taken care of. Twenty-five thousand patients a
year pass through the hospital and Father Lyons is there every day to
visit the sick and console the afflicted. He instructs, baptizes, gives
the last sacraments of the Church to the dying.

He is seventy-five now and this has been his life. For a long time he
was stationed in Chicago where he did the same thing at the county
hospital day after day. And now he is down in St. Louis; there are three
priests in charge there, doing eight hours duty each, doing the work
which he started.

"R" Schools
---

Father Lyons is stationed at the colored Church in St. Louis and his
special interest is in starting what he calls "R" schools among the
colored. "R" stands for Religion and knowing how diffident people are
about coming to rectories and to churches for instruction he has started
many of his little schools in the homes of the colored themselves. It
may be classes for children in the basement of some home on Saturday or
weekday afternoons; it may mean evening meetings in the home of some
Catholic colored woman or of one of his converts. We visited one of
these homes one evening, and the gathering reminded one of primitive
Christianity--instruction going on in the bosom of the family and
becoming very close and homelike. Father Lyons thinks far more important
his work in starting these "R" schools than the weary hours of visiting
that he does daily and nightly in the hospital.Â  He wishes other priests
to follow this technique which is so simple and effective, and he has
issued many pamphlets on the subject, begging the money to get them
printed.

Visiting the Sick
---

It was good to go with him on this afternoon to the hospital. It was an
experience one never forgets. The saintly old man of seventy-five, still
so vigorous and full of energy and zeal, going from bed to bed and
approaching his friends with childlike faith that God would give the
desire when he was so ready to satisfy the need.

"Did you ever think of becoming a Catholic?" he would say again and
again with great and generous directness. "Do you know any thing about
the faith? Can't I tell you something about it?"

Day by day he visits and finds out the faith of each patient who comes
in.

"You see Father here at the strangest hours," one old Negro said. "At
any time of the night I just open my eyes and there he is."

The hospital itself is a terrible place, not only for its human woe.
They have built another hospital for the colored into which they are
soon going to move, but for a long time they have been housed in an
ancient medical school with huge loft-like rooms, crowded together with
little air or sunlight. Children are in the wards with the adults, but
these at least have beds near the windows. The black heads stand out
stark and hauntingly beautiful in their gaunt suffering against the
white of the sheets and the dingy white of the wards. The Negro has
learned the "art of acceptance" as Romain Rolland calls it.

Greatest Gift
---

It is too late now to think in terms of social justice for these dying
ones. One can work for their race and for better conditions for all. But
for these men, lying there dying, what can one offer?

Father Lyons knows that he has that which means beauty and joy and peace
to them. He realizes that he alone in his role of priest can give them
the greatest gift this world has to offer. He can bring to them Christ
Himself. And he so wants to give them what he has been empowered to
give, that he is tireless in his efforts.

Love, St. Ignatius says, is an exchange of gifts. This son of Ignatius,
Father Lyons, has indeed a heart full of love.
