% No Regrets,' Mooney Tells C. W. Interviewer
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1937, 1.

*Summary: Describes a visit to Tom Mooney who was jailed in 1915 for
labor organizing and who spends his days caring for infirm inmates in
San Quentin prison. Mooney sees Christ as "a great Leader of the workers
who set an example of laying down His life for the poor and dispossessed
of this world." (DDLW \#326).*


"Greater love hath no man than this, that he give up his life for his
friend."

Tom Mooney is starting his twenty-second year in jail. Who has not heard
of him, framed for trying to organize the street car employees of San
Francisco, exercising a natural right, a right emphasized by Pope Leo
XIII in 1891, and in 1931 reemphasized by Pope Pius XI, since he found
it so necessary to try to make his own Catholic children understand.

Freedom is as dear to us as life and Tom Mooney has given up his. I went
out to see him at San Quentin the other day – Father O'Kelly, the
seamen's priest driving me. Two members of the Marine Cooks' and
Stewards' Union went with us. The drive was a beautiful one, out over
the Golden Gate Bridge (where 23 workers lost their lives in building
it), out through the hills and around the tortuous bays where seagulls
shrilly proclaimed their freedom. San Quentin is a buttressed fortress
on a bay, surrounded by a village of guards' houses and by flower
gardens and sunlight and fresh sea breezes that Tom Mooney seldom feels.

Work of Mercy
---

We waited a long time to see him and we wondered whether it was petty
persecution on the part of the guards. But we were unjust in our
suspicions because it was Mooney himself, unwilling to leave the bedside
of a dying prisoner in the hospital ward where he is orderly, that
caused the delay. He started telling us about it right away.

"I've been holding a funnel from the oxygen tank over his face for about
three hours," he explained. "We haven't got very modern equipment here.
First one arm would get paralyzed and then the other. But I had to wait
until someone could spell me." He smiled as he explained the delay.

He has a happy, serene face. He has the joy a man has who loves to serve
his fellows, and who loves his fellows where he serves. And he seizes
the opportunities afforded him by his work in jail, as he would seize
any opportunity outside.

"It's the little things that make up the big things," he said, when I
told him I was glad that he could throw himself into his work like that.
"I've had to live from day to day. Right now I look forward to nothing.
I expect nothing. Why should I hope for freedom from the Supreme Court?
We'll cross that bridge when we get to it."

We asked him if he had time to read much. "My hours are from five-thirty
in the morning until nine-thirty at night sometimes," he said. "And when
I'm through I fall into bed and sleep like a log. If I have a chance to
get off in the afternoon, I go out in the sun, but usually there's too
much to do. I've got nineteen patients, and their comfort depends on me.
I can't get out of it. Meals, bedpans, temperatures, charts, and like
today, the oxygen tank. There's always something. Men after an operation
don't have sedatives, morphine or anything like that here. After all,
their aim is not to make men comfortable. So there's lots to do.

Irony
---

Mooney had heard of THE CATHOLIC WORKER for a long time and occasionally
he sees copies of it. "Some of your readers write to me," he said. "One
of them, Miss Metcalf, in Los Angeles, sends her dividend check from the
Power and Light Company, the very gang that railroaded me, to my defense
committee. She must be a swell person."

We asked Mooney about his religious belief – he was born a Catholic –
and he said he believed Christ to be a great Leader of the workers who
set an example of laying down His life for the poor and the dispossessed
of this world. "But as for organized religion – I am not for it. The
great masses of workers throughout the world have protested against the
injustice done me, but few churchmen. There was Father Bleakly, though,"
he remembered, "one of the editors of "America," who came out in my
defense. And another whose name I don't remember from St. Ignatius in
Chicago who spoke of my case when he was out here in California. And
Archbishop Hanna signed a petition for my release. Another defender was
Msgr. John A. Ryan."

Since Mooney's imprisonment, the labor movement has been winning the
right to organize all over the country, but painfully, with blood and
tears. Mooney's example has lent them courage, and their efforts have
given him courage to face his life of imprisonment.

Privilege to Be a Martyr
---

"Someone asked me once if I had any regrets, -- if I mourned the fact
that I have had to spend my life imprisoned. And I said to them, and I
say now, that I consider it a privilege to have been permitted to give
myself in this way to the cause of the working class. When I was a boy
back in Chicago I worked hard and saved my money that I made as a
moulder, and took a trip to Europe. I went around with a Baedeker,
enjoying everything. Then when I got back, I wandered from one end of
the country to the other, looking for work, finally landing out here.
That experience made me convinced that only the organized efforts of the
masses could better their conditions. I started organizing. I do not
think if I had remained outside I could have done more to encourage
unionization of the workers than I have done behind prison bars. It is
an honor and a privilege to have been awarded this part to play."

(We do not consider it necessary to review Mooney's case which is well
known to the workers. Any of our readers who wish information can write
to The Tom Mooney Defense Committee, San Francisco, Calif.) (To be
continued)

Dorothy Day, who is now on the Pacific Coast, promises plenty of news of
the labor situation there for the December issue.
