% Distinguished Visitors Mark Past Month
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1938, 1, 4.

*Summary: Another appeal has gone out entrusting their needs to St.
Joseph. Notes how busy everyone is at the office, on the breadline, and
on the farm. (Someone had noted the hordes of young men around the CW
and wondered what they do.) Mentions that public works such as bridge
building can be considered works of mercy. (DDLW \#333).*

DAY AFTER DAY
-------------

This month, on the feast of St. Joseph, we started sending out our
appeal, which we find necessary to do about twice a year. I wrote it
down at Fr. Joachim's place at Silver Springs, where I was staying with
the Missionary servants for a few days to hand over my finished book to
them. (Conversion.)

I wrote the appeal in a little room right off the chapel, than I took it
and read it to our Lord, St. Joseph and the Blessed Mother (though the
flesh of Jesus was the flesh of Mary, I list St. Joseph first because he
was the head of the house).

So now I can tell our creditors with complete conviction that our bills
will be taken care of within a month.

Last time we sent out an appeal the printer called up, and Julia told
him, as we tell our creditors, Edison, Telephone company, printer and
grocer,-- that St. Joseph will take care of it immediately.

Whereupon Mr. Carroll, the head of the firm, having received the message
from his secretary, wanted to know "who this man Joseph is who's paying
your bills?"

Bill Callahan is on the road. Peter is also on the road and occasionally
we get a postal from him. "I am in San Antonio. I am going to Amarillo.
Your fellow worker in Christ's kingdom. Peter."

We don't know where to reach him, (does he really think that he is
minding my order to keep in touch with us?) And he is supposed to speak
in Washington, to the seminarians. Will anybody who sees him tell him he
has an engagement and to please keep it, no matter how fertile the field
he finds stretching around him?

Who's Who
---

John Curran is down at the farm, recovering from a long drawn out attack
of grippe and cold (he has been carrying on correspondence just the
same) and Jim Schneid has gone to Troy to help with the work up there
for a few weeks. Gerry Griffin is helping our carpenter (he knows
nothing about carpentry, but he is willing, says Mr. O'Connell) and that
leaves only Joe Zarrella taking charge of the office. Tim O'Brien is
busy day and night with the CUU and John Cort, Pat Whalen and Martin
Flynn likewise on the ACTU. Herb Welch and Cy Echele are out selling
papers every day and John Mella's on the job pounding an adding machine
all day. They all take turns on the coffee line and Jim Braizel, general
handy man around Mott Street (he has a sly wit, so Miss Clements calls
him impudent), fills in everywhere. Dan the bursar is on hand from nine
to nine, and Frank and Kate Smith keep the circulation part going.
Stanley has deserted the street apostolate for the time being to be a
drawer of water and hewer of wood on the farm. But Big Dan is always
out, making himself seen and heard (very much heard) on the streets of
New York.

(Somebody was talking about the hordes of young men around the CW and
what do they do to make themselves useful. Hence the above accounting,
rather sketchy.)

Peter's Fault
---

They do indeed look like an awful swarm crowded into one of the little
offices when there are visitors and interesting conversation going on.
Then other times visitors come and there is no one around,--everybody is
off performing one or another of the works of mercy and over the
telephone come calls for this one or that and they cannot be found.

It's all Peter's fault. He says that journalists must make history as
well as write it, so we do not really consider ourselves to be editors
anchored behind desks from nine to five. We are out and around, and our
friends knowing these irregular habits don't mind calling to find out
when to reach us. Many of our visitors come at ten or eleven at night,
and some we find waiting for us when we get up in the morning. One young
priest coming into town early one morning (he was from Duluth) saw the
line and just stood on it. It was the surest way of finding one of the
crowd. Up to ten they're not in the office but on the line or in the
kitchen.

Guests
---

Last month the office was filled from morning to night. Most illustrious
guest was Prince Lowenstein of Austria, a person we all liked immensely
though one of our crowd who'd spent a good deal of his past as a
transient worker and familiar of Bowery and Skid Row inhabitants was
rather stiff necked on meeting him though he said after he left "he's a
prince all right," spelling it with a small letter to compliment him. We
grieve with him now at the fate of his beloved country. The Catholics
there too are going to have to "complete the sufferings of Christ."

The Baroness de Hueck spent a few weeks with us (she also is a familiar
of the least of Christ's children).

Father Tompkins from Nova Scotia was a visitor and a stimulating one,
and we promised him when we got the money we would get out a pamphlet on
the works of mercy brought up to date to include credit unions and
cooperatives. He told us that in the Middle Ages bridge building and
such like public works carried indulgences with them and could be
considered works of mercy.
