% A New Year Begins
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1940, 4.

*Summary: Lauds their daily routine of prayer, reading, and hospitality
in New York and around the country. Says they feed 900 for breakfast,
and a couple of hundred at lunch and supper. (DDLW \#369).*

A New Year Begins
===

Stanley, Teresa and I were walking home from the library down at Chatham
Square on East Broadway. It was one of those cold sparkling evenings
with a bright moon and crackling stars. You could eat and drink the air
it was so good.

"There used to be a well in the middle of Chatham Square," said Teresa,
"where everyone came for water."

"There are still two wells on Mott street from which factories get their
water," Stanley said.

"There used to be a stream on Canal street, and Mr. O'Connell used to
fish there," Teresa went on, longingly.

"And there used to be a twenty-acre lake just off Canal street, but they
filled it all in," Stanley added.

Times are changed since those days in old New York, but I was thinking
as they chattered on either side of me, that the Catholic Worker had not
changed much these last eight Advents. The work goes on, the paper comes
out, the most important thing seems to be meals and beds, and people who
need them. This very evening before we stopped at the library we were
looking for another House of Hospitality, not too far away from Mott
street, to take care of an overflow of women in need, one of whom will
have a baby by the time we get the new house.

Our days are the same. Mass and Communion, breakfast, and people all the
day, people in need, and people who want to help, trying to know God, to
love Him and serve Him in their fellows. And that is all that life is.
The writing, the traveling and speaking flow out of it. The reading and
study are to enable us to do it better. The moments that we have now are
what count. The past is gone and the future we cannot know, thank God.

"This is My Refreshing!"
===

And how important is the work of each one of us! The men in the kitchen,
the men who run the breadline, the fellow who keeps the yard clean, old
Pop who straightens up the fifth floor. They are working for each other.
They are working for the movement all over the country. And they are
doing the most important work. *"This is my rest, refresh the weary, and
this is my refreshing,"*the Lord said. (Isaias 28.12.)

Last month a Daily News reporter wrote a story about missions and places
where a down-and-outer could get something to eat. He came when we were
lowest in food in the summer, and he came at the end of the line that
night, so all he got was hot boiled cabbage (he mentioned that it was
hot) and black bread. He said that one was treated well at the CW but he
said that "150 a day were fed." This hurt Peter Clark and John Cannan,
who have charge of the breadline in the morning and the lunch and supper
at night respectively. There are 900 or so to breakfast and a couple of
hundred for both lunch and supper. None could criticize Peter's coffee
and John's meals have been so good, so often--soup for lunch and meat,
potatoes and salad for supper--that he thought it was too bad the world
should have been informed otherwise. Never mind, these fellow workers of
ours are refreshing the Lord, and not just a Daily News reporter.

Ask any of these men if we should feed the hungry in Europe and they
know only one answer, because they are the poor, they are the little
ones of Christ. They know poverty, they have been on breadlines, they
have heard talk of the undeserving poor. They are not teachers,
scholars, diplomats. They have been the destitute, and now they are the
poor. "Those who are in honor are without understanding."

Our Father Compassionate
===

Pius XII warns us against "the peril of moral depression, a want of
confidence consequent upon the weakness of Faith, Hope and Charity. Now,
these three theological virtues, rays of light and bonds of love between
man and God, gain fresh fire from the flames darting from the most
Sacred Heart of Jesus. In contemplating this Heart and its open wound,
men would come to understand that God is for them not only the Lord who
must be served and before whom one must tremble, but He is also the
compassionate and tender Father, who is to be loved and who loves. Then
the most depressed heart would beat high again and the most perturbed
spirit be calmed."
