% Day After Day - July/August 1941
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July/August 1941, 1,3.

*Summary: Diary-like account of a trip to Catholic Worker houses and
farms through the Midwest. Ends on retreat in Pittsburgh given by Fr.
Hugo and says they left renewed, with a new perspective. (DDLW \#373).*

**August 1**

It is the end of a long month, long because I have been traveling all
this time, covering CATHOLIC WORKER houses, farms, all over the county,
and the Civilian Service Camp for the Catholic Conscientious Objectors
at Stoddard, N.H. It is actually two months since the paper came out,
since we issue only a July-August paper in the summer, and there has
been constant traveling since June.

**June first.**This was the feast of Pentecost and Jon Thornton, one of
the leaders of the Baltimore work, was confirmed in the cathedral.
Members of the New York, Philadelphia and Baltimore groups were present.
The confirmation was at night, and at midnight we drove back to Easton
in the station wagon. How we bless the benefactor who gave it to us, and
on how many works of mercy, spiritual and corporal, has this station
wagon taken us. It was beautiful driving back through the warm night,
and there was not much traffic along the roads. Quite different from a
night trip we had made a few weeks earlier, when we picked up a few
soldiers, home on furlough, one of them from Trinidad and one from
Texas. They and we became quite stiff with the cold.

**June six.**Paid the installment on the mortgage on the farm at Easton.
There is two thousand still to go. We do some heavy praying this time
every year and God rewards our reliance by moving the heart of one of
our friends to send us five hundred dollars.

**June 7.**Miss Tracy from Santa Barbara, California, was in for a
visit. She told us about a strike out there of lemon pickers. It is the
largest lemon grove in the world and there are hundreds of Mexican
families living on it. They have been there for a long time, but now
they are being dispossessed and Okies hired in their place. This issue
of ownership is a tremendous one. No matter what the wages, the
conditions, people are not going to be content to be under a paternal
system, under a form of serfdom. It is a denial of their human dignity.
Property is proper to man. "How much land does a man need?" is the title
of one of Tolstoi's short stories. Certainly not 298,000 acres.

**June 10.** Spoke at the American Jewish Congress Women's luncheon in
New York.

**June 11.** Started on my trip, first stop being at Sister Peter
Claver's retreat house at Gillette, New Jersey, for one day. Here there
are retreats and days of recollection for Negroes, and we can bring
anyone we wish, no cost and our Lord will feed us. "If He doesn't send
us food there is always bread and water," Sister says. But we've never
had to go on that yet. As a matter of fact, last time we were there,
Julia felt it necessary to make a day of penance, she had so enjoyed the
good meals the sisters provided, and she fasted from both food and drink
all the following Friday until sundown.

Soap and Soup
===

**June 12.**Arrived at midnight at St. Joseph's House, Pittsburgh, where
Father Rice is the head. This is the only house we have which has a
priest in charge. Some years ago, Bishop Boyle turned over an old
orphanage to our group and beginning with a few rooms, the men in the
house have cleaned, painted, furnished the entire house so that in the
depths of winter as many as 250 have been accommodated in one night. It
was a terribly hard struggle at first, even to provide soap, let alone
soup. I remember one visit when we were having parsnip soup and
sassafras tea for a week, than which there can be no more mortifying
diet. And all the while Mr. Lenz, who from the first has been one of the
most faithful workers in the house would sit and tell us how good it was
for us all. He cannot bear to hear me describe some of those meals now.
It was never as bad as I painted it, he rebukes me. But it was pretty
bad. Now, thanks to Father Rice's energetic begging, everyone sits down
to three good meals a day.

Run and Overrun
===

There is daily Mass and rosary and benediction in the evening. There are
meetings, people in the neighborhood are being affected by the work,
children are taken on picnics and swimming every Saturday, there is
growing up a community spirit. The atmosphere of the house, while
orderly, is of such informality, that Father's sitting room is always
being overrun, his books walked off with. Donald McCarthy is in charge
of the house and authority is delegated to many others in charge of
different departments of the house so that everything runs with great
smoothness. The entire place has been built up by the men who have come
in on the line, and Father Rice's job has been to direct and coordinate
activities. Which means that he gets all the blame and all the
criticism. His interest was originally with organized labor, but he has
always recognized the greater need of the unorganized and the unemployed
and has done a great job to keep members of the unions reminded of their
poorer brothers.

Man's Dignity
===

One of the successes of the labor movement has been to make men
recognize their dignity as men and their responsibility to their
fellows, but one of the mistakes of the organized worker is his class
war attitude, his recognition of his dignity on the basis of power and
strength of the union. This comes out clearly when a man loses his job
or his union card because of his inability to keep up with dues. His
dignity as a worker evaporates. Instead of that consciousness of his
dignity being derived from the fact that he is a brother of Christ; that
he is a temple of the Holy Spirit, a creature of body and soul, it is
derived from a sense of power over the bosses. First of all, we must
have Christians before we can have good union men. There will be no true
solidarity or unionism until workers realize the Fatherhood of God.

Laundry Worker
===

**June 13.**Had lunch with Amy Ballinger, vice-president of the laundry
workers' union which has a membership of 1,400, seventy-five per cent
Catholic and eighty per cent women, and hundred per cent organized. A
great deal needs to be done for the laundry workers in New York. Spoke
to the men in the House of Hospitality after supper. Meant to speak ten
minutes and probably spoke an hour. A stimulating audience.

**June 14.**Visited Brother Matthews' St. Francis House, which is a
center on the top of a high hill, looking out over the city and
surrounded by various institutions belonging to the Passionists. The
group at St. Francis work with families in the neighborhood, and is a
center rather than a House of Hospitality. We could do with many centers
in many towns. Groups come in for discussion, books and pamphlets and
papers are kept circulating and Peter's favorite work of
"indoctrinating" goes on apace.

Midwest Houses
===

**June 15 and 16.**Visited the three Houses of Hospitality in Cleveland
and the farm. The good work of Tom Marrigan at Blessed Martin House and
of John Carmody at St. Anthony's house, makes it possible for Bill
Gauchat, the leader of the work in Cleveland, to spend a good part of
his time at the farming commune (Our Lady of the Wayside) where they had
summer school this year.

**June 17.**Visited the Toledo house and farm (the latter is an
uncertainty as yet). Bernard Duck and Jim Walser were keeping everything
going with the help of a committee.

**June 18.**Stopped for the first time at the South Bend house, operated
by Norbert Merdjingski and Julian Pleasants, both of whom graduated from
Notre Dame this June. There were about seventy-five men a day being fed
and cared for on the upper floor of an old house. Father Mathis and a
few other priests at Notre Dame have been helping in the work, and come
on Sundays to offer Mass right at the house.

On the Mississippi
===

**June 21.**The past three days were spent in Davenport, Iowa, where
there were a few days of discussion on social action, during a summer
school at St. Ambrose College. Ade Bethune and I were both on the
program speaking on a Philosophy of Labor, voluntary poverty and the
works of mercy, farming communes, etc. Father Catich and Msgr. Hauber
gave me a little Ford coupe to drive back to New York. 1930, good
condition, unobtrusive looking, but noisy sounding. Fr. Catich and Ade
painted on either door the insignia, The Catholic Worker, and what with
the Iowa license plates, people will be misled into thinking we have an
Iowa house or headquarters whereas in reality we have not, only friends.
Ade and I were taken out fishing on the Mississippi.

Milwaukee
===

**June 25.**Visited the new Milwaukee House for the first time. It is
nestled between railroad tracks and the river, and trains and the lake
boats keep the night alive. The house is a good one, large dormitory
upstairs, huge meeting room downstairs. So much food is contributed that
they cannot dispose of it all at times. There has always been a large
and faithful group who come to the meetings and keep the work going.
There are scholars who teach at Marquette, workers interested most in
the labor movement. C.O.'s headed by Frank Bates and although there may
be differences of opinion, there is no dissension.

**June 26.**On to Libertyville, with Nina Poleyn, to spend the day with
the Ladies of the Grail. There is a good story of their work in this
month's Orate Fratres. Here is a place of retreat which has been used by
the Milwaukee group and by friends from Chicago. There is constant
discussion on the lay apostolate and techniques of action. A stimulating
crowd.

Peter in Chicago
===

**June 27.**Met Peter in Chicago and a crowd of us sat on Al Reser's
back porch and talked until midnight. Fr. Hugo said the "creature" to
which the CATHOLIC WORKER adherents is most attached, is talking. Which
is true of course, but then it is not often that a group from several
houses get together with Peter.

John Cogley has written a play which is being put on this summer. The
Chicago Catholic Worker has not come out for a few months and everyone
is missing it and asking why. Finances for one thing, summer also, and I
suppose John's play. It had better be good!

Lou Murphy
===

**June 28.**Arrived for a few days' visit at St. Benedict's farm, run by
Lou Murphy of the Detroit C.W. It is a place of beauty. The chapel is in
the house and before I had caught my breath after my all-day trip Don
Coughlin had dragged me in to admire the new marble altar, constructed
by one of the men from marble slabs from a bank. It would take an
edition of the paper to tell of the work in Detroit, in the two houses
and on the farm. Eventually we are going to try to bring out a
paper-covered book, a history of all the houses so that others
throughout the country will be encouraged to open hospices in their
cities. After this war they will be more needed than ever. Even now,
though most of the younger men have found work, there is still a
tremendous need since relief rolls and WPS rolls have been cut. There
are not only those older men, the injured and sick, the incapable, but
also the transient, looking for work. Our breadlines are as long as
ever.

Fr. Hugo
===

**July 3-11.**Spent this week at St. Anthony's orphanage, just outside
of Pittsburgh, on a retreat given by Father Hugo. Eighteen members of
our groups from the middle west were there. St. Anthony's village has
about two hundred children but room was made for us in the gymnasium and
one of the classrooms. We spent this period in complete silence, the day
beginning at six and ending at ten. For spiritual reading at meals we
had the entire life of St. Francis by Jorgenson, and there were five
conferences a day. These were so stimulating that not a moment dragged.
We read nothing but the New Testament, and we all took copius notes. It
was a time of real study, to put off the old man and on the new, and we
came out with a real sense of renewal, a feeling that we obtained a
perspective, a point of view that gave balance to our outlook. Fr. Hugo
follows the retreats given by Fr. Lacouture, a French-Canadian Jesuit,
who has given many to priests.

Bishop Boyle
===

I had a good visit this time at both St. Joseph's house and St. Francis
Center. Also Bishop Boyle kept me conversing for almost three hours one
evening on rammed earth houses, on Mexican friends from the steel works
at Homestead, on cooperatives and the craft movement, and other aspects
of the work of social reconstructions. He has been always a good friend
to the Catholic Worker movement.

Before I left, Fr. Rice bought me four new tires for my car which made
us venture the mountains of Pennsylvania with more confidence. After all
the little car was used to the plains.

Only two days were spent at home, at Easton and Mott street. Then the
traveling began again.

July 19 I spoke at St. Bonaventures, at Olean, and met many of our
friends there. July 21 I visited and spoke at the Cooperstown camp for
Conscientious Objectors, which is run by the Quakers. And the rest of
July I spent at our own C.O. camp and at the Houses and farms in
Vermont.
