% Day After Day - July/August 1942
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July/August 1942, 1, 4.

*Summary: Updates about Odell Waller's execution, the plight of
Japanese-Americans in detention camps, the release of Panchelly,
Woodworth, and Brown from Trenton Penetentiary, and the doings of
various Catholic Workers such as Ossie Bondy, Peter Maurin, and Ade
Bethune. Recounts her brushes with the FBI inquiring about conscientious
objectors and the Office of Censorship, and shares her concern that the
military has occupied land belonging to Catholic institutions. Gives the
schedule of retreats, a description of Mott Street in oppresive Summer
heat and various infestations, and an expression of gratitude to Nina
Polcyn (Milwaukee) and Justine L'Esperance (Detroit) for their help.
(DDLW \#384).*

Since the last issue of The Catholic Worker came out, almost two months
ago, Odell Waller, the Negro sharecropper was put to death in the
electric chair. All appeals for clemency were in vain. Perhaps those in
authority thought that with Waller dead, the issue of the injustice
would die with him. So many men are dying these days.

\*\*\*
===

A Japanese correspondent (a young girl in college) writes the sad story
of a little Japanese boy playing ball, and the ball rolling outside the
fence of the stockade in which the Japanese were confined, and the
shooting to death of this same little boy.

The Japanese in concentration camps are getting out mimeographed papers
and one of the sheets warned its readers not to go near the fences any
more.

\*\*\*
===

Panchelly, Woodworth and Brown, the three seamen who were arrested in
Hoboken on New Year's day, 1937, for getting into a fight with a
longshoreman who afterwards accused them of robbing him of \$20, (which
money was never found) and were sentenced to fifteen years in Trenton
penitentiary, were released last month on parole. The Sister who sent
Panchelly her stamp collection will be happy to hear this good news.

\*\*\*
===

Letters and cards were received from O'Toole who works on a transport to
Australia, and from Ossie Bondy, former head of the Windsor House of
Hospitality who is now in England. We had not heard from O'Toole for
some months so we thank God for his safety.

Another old friend of the paper, James McGovern, first mate of a tanker
lost his life a few months ago. He leaves a wife and child.

\*\*\*
===

During the month Chuck Larrowe, brother of Dwight, who is head of our
Catholic camp for C.O.'s, sailed for Egypt to drive an ambulance for the
American Field Service.

\*\*\*
===

Peter Maurin, theorist of the Green Revolution, spent the last month at
Easton at Maryfarm. Now he is leaving for Our Lady of the Wayside Farm,
at Avon, Ohio, where Bill Gauchat conducts a summer school at which
Peter Maurin and Ade Bethune will teach. Peter will visit the Alcuin
community at Danvers, New York, which the boys from the Philadelphia
farm have joined, and the new farm outside of Rochester. Later in the
summer he will take a trip through New England, so those friends and
readers of the paper who wish a visit from Peter will please get in
touch with us.

\*\*\*
===

We have so many visits from FBI men who are making inquiries as to the
sincerity of young Catholic men claiming the status of conscientious
objectors that we all but wrote an editorial this month on "Love and the
FBI." One government man acted as though he had never heard of the
Sermon on the Mount, and the idea of loving one's enemies is strange to
many of them. You come from an interview slightly dazed, not quite sure
whether either of you knows what the other is talking about. These
government men are supposed to inquire only as to the reliability and
credibility of the men they are investigating, but to do this they seem
to have to query you as to your beliefs, the work you are engaged in and
the why and wherefore of it.

\*\*\*
===

Letters also came during the month from the Office of Censorship in
Washington. So far there is a bureau set up to impose only a voluntary
censorship. It publishes a Code of Wartime Practices for the American
Press. Objection was made to our story on the Japanese, in the same
issue, and to our calling attention (naming locations) of anti-aircraft
nests on the west coast. The exchange of letters was pleasant, we
apologized for our indiscretion in naming locations such as cities and
monastery gardens by name, and they thanked us. But we are forced to
repeat our protest at the presence of anti-aircraft batteries or some
kind of camps along our waterfront, on the property of Catholic
Institutions.

This charge was made during the Spanish Civil War--that Churches and
Catholic Institutions were used as military centers and that is one
reason why Churches were burned and priests put to death. Now again
during a visit to a Catholic Institution along our East Coast, I find
that six acres of the grounds have been taken by the War Department of
the United States (at a rental of a dollar for the duration of the war)
and that a small army encampment has been set up.

\*\*\*
===

It is ten o'clock at night as I write, and very hot indeed. There is
scarcely a breath of air stirring. These hot July nights people from the
tenements round about sit late in the park. There is a special bench
across the street in the little park, right under the shadow of the city
jail, where the women from our house stop to refresh themselves before
going into the close house.

The timeout is refreshing, one can see the sky, the moon and stars. The
leaves of the plane trees have started to fall already and are carpeting
the bare ground in back of the benches. "There's an Italian saying,"
quotes Mary, our neighbor, "with the fifteenth of August, say goodbye to
summer."

The women's house is crowded now, sixteen of us, with three more in the
country, including Eric. There are enough vegetables coming in from the
farm to feed the women's house, but not enough for the men's, because of
the breadline there.

There are thirty on the Easton farm, and the little camp on Staten
Island has been packed with small boys, fifteen of them, for the past
two weeks. Now they have gone home and four mothers with their children
have taken their places.

Summer is a time of vacations, of visitors, of retreats for all the
members of our groups. This summer all our friends are making their
annual retreat at Pittsburgh and there will be none on the Easton farm
until later in the fall, and then only for the group there. (The next
retreat for women at Oakmount, Pa., is from August 2-9th^^ and that for
men is from August 9-16. For further information, write Fr. Farina, St.
Anthony's Village, Oakmount, Pa. Fr. J. J. Hugo gives the retreat.)

Visitors
===

We have much appreciated the help of Nina Polcyn of Milwaukee and
Justine L'Esperance of the Detroit group this summer. It would have been
hard sledding but for them, what with the shortage of men. Larry Blum,
seminarian from the Society of the Divine Word came for a brief visit
and remained to help for a month, and Jack Thornton and Gerry Griffin
are still with us though they will probably both be gone before another
month is out.

The women visitors rejoiced over the new house on Bayard street, though
Nina complained that she had been kept awake last night by a Communist
meeting in a neighboring house where there was singing of the
International and a discussion.

"Christ was the first communist" and

"What has that got to do with Lenin," was all she heard of it in between
snatches of sleep.

We have had our share of plagues this summer, to bring this account up
to date. Rats as big as ground hogs, suddenly have infested the house,
there have been fleas, cockroaches and bed bugs to an alarming degree.
And the rain has poured down, in between heat waves, leaving everyone to
steam and stew and itch. But there are traps and cats for the rats, and
kerosene for the bugs, and in these poor neighborhoods, thank God,
people live like gypsies out under the sky a good part of the summer. So
I shall put this writing to one side, and go out into the stillness of
the night, and sit on a bench under a plane tree across the street and
looking up to the sky, say to the Lord, "I have loved, O Lord, the
beauty of *Thy* house," even if I do not care for my own.
