% Day After Day - March 1943
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1943, 1, 4.

*Summary: Describes her tour of the South in prose which evokes the
rigors of travelling by bus in wartime and her reactions to the people
she meets in Florida and Alabama. Praises the work of priests and
religious in Alabama. Describes the hard work and poor housing for
Negroes, Southern land ownership patterns, and race relations. (DDLW
\#387).*

The story of a journey. It was balmy and sunny as I got on the bus in
Miami in the middle of February. The birds were just beginning to sing
after months of silence, and the orange trees burst into blossom. There
were many trees still bare, though, because it was just spring there and
the buds had not started to come out on the cypress trees in the
Everglade swamps where the Seminole Indians live. The bus was not
crowded for it was early in the morning, still dark. We crossed the
peninsula, on a smooth all day trip to Sarasota, where I was to stop
over with Margaret Connolly, one of our friends from Pittsburgh who has
come to Florida with her mother on account of her health. She has an
apostolate there, for her tiny little house is in the midst of circus
people who settle there for the winter, and many of them are former
Catholics.

Tampa
===

As I arrived the weather broke and became cold and the one heavy cold
spell that always seems to hit Florida every winter was there. In Tampa
it was not so bad, but still too brisk for their heatless houses. There
I was the guest of Ida Caminitti, a Hungarian, married to an Italian
detective, and we had a most delightful day together. She herself runs
something of a house of hospitality in her own home and exemplifies the
sense of personal responsibility. It is amazing what one woman is able
to do. Priests and sisters turn to her for her help in settling problems
and one of the Holy Name sisters told me how when there were poor
children who needed operations and other such problems they called Ida
and got her advice and help. She is not a trained social worker, but she
knows what to do always in an emergency. I spoke at two of the Holy Name
schools, and in the afternoon at a Jesuit high school; then visited a
Salesian orphanage where I was delighted to find my pastor from Mott
street, New York, Fr. Trifari, about to give a retreat. I saw, too, the
beginnings of a farming commune that Ida is aiming towards. She herself
knows many crafts and is an able teacher and the beautiful spot she
showed me where a beginning has been made will be an ideal location for
a little village of farmers and craftsmen.

That night I got on the bus at nine to journey all night towards my next
stop. By now it was bitter cold. The bus was jammed, people standing in
the aisles. Everyone in the armed forces going on leave and all those
going to visit camps, like to travel all night to conserve some of their
precious hours of leave, so the busses are always jammed. At 5 o'clock
we were in Tallahassee, the capital of Florida, and it was fourteen
above zero. I was chilled to the bone, but I comforted myself, in the
disagreeable way humans have, by reflecting on the group at the c.o.
camp at Warner, New Hampshire, where it has been sixty below zero this
winter!

Waiting
===

The bus station was a tiny one and crowded to the doors with people
waiting for busses to New Orleans, to the west coast, to the east, to
Miami, to Atlanta, and points north. There were only a few benches and
every bit of floor space was taken by people sitting on their suitcases.
The door opened and shut and let in blasts of cold wind. The pot bellied
stove roared and when the doors were not open the atmosphere was
stifling. Our wait was a three-hour one and never did three hours drag
so long and wearily. From five to eight most religious are making their
meditations, saying their office, offering their daily Mass. The most
important work of the day was being done. But everyone in that bus
station was in a stupor of fatigue. Hard to say a morning prayer in a
place like that.

By two in the afternoon we had arrived at Columbus, Ga., and my
destination was across the river, into the State of Alabama for
twenty-three miles to the Holy Trinity, the cradle of those two new
religious orders founded by Father Judge, the Missionary servants of the
Most Holy Trinity.

They have a Cenacle in Phoenixville, Alabama, which is what they call
their houses--a school run by the sisters. The principal told me of the
unorganized condition of workers in the huge mills there and in Columbus
and the long hours, and less pay they were getting now. Of course, they
are all working, which is more than they did during the depression, but
they are still the poor, still living in bad houses, still slaves of the
machine, and degraded as Pope Pius XI said, by that service to the
machine. The sisters know the conditions; they teach the children of the
workers.

Pilgrimage
===

It was good to see the first little chapel of the Missionary Servants,
which is an old Negro cabin and which still is a chapel. In the crude
sacristy built on like a porch Fr. Judge slept on a slab of wood. A
Vincentian himself, sent to work in the South, the lay people who came
to help him, were formed by him into two religious communities and have
grown tremendously in the last quarter of a century. Their work is to
seek out the most abandoned ones and they certainly find them in the
South. They have charge of a good deal of work among the poor of the
North and they must also get their support from the North for the St.
Peter Claver Negro Mission at Holy Trinity and the Cenacle at Pensacola
that takes care of the fishermen where I visited three years ago.

I was reminded of my winter reading about the Fathers of the Desert as I
drove out into the Alabama wilderness to reach the 2,500 acres of St.
Joseph's school at Holy Trinity. The Sisters, a mile away, have 1,500
acres. They came to settle here because one of the Sisters, as a lay
woman, possessed these 1,500 acres which she turned over to the
community. The brothers bought the adjoining land. Nearby plantations
are owned by individuals and are of 20,000 acres in extent.

Ownership
===

Mr. Patterson, for instance, owns 20,000 acres and each year he loses a
little to the state to pay his taxes. Perhaps even some Negro family,
frugal and lucky, have been able to buy. I did not see much of absentee
ownership in this area. Not like Arkansas and Oklahoma where fifty to
one hundred thousand acre tracts are owned by insurance companies and
banks in the north. Mr. Patterson has twenty-five families farming his
land and paying rent for their acreage at the rate of a bale of cotton a
year. One good Negro farmer told me it took 19 acres to raise two bales
of cotton. "Used to get a bale to two acres," he said, "but now what
with drought and boll weevil those times are gone."

The land is exhausted, of course, and the market uncertain. But still
that does not excuse the owners from allowing their tenants to live in
such crowded and hideous condition.

The first family we visited comprised twenty-two people, all in two
rooms. Most families number around ten or twelve and always just the two
rooms, a fireplace in each room, cooking done in a fireplace from that
meager flame. Over and over again that morning I saw the burnt limbs of
little Negro children caused by being pushed into, or falling into, the
fire.

Fr. Gilbert
===

Fr. Gilbert is in charge of the St. Peter Claver mission, which was
built up by the labor of Fr. Celestine and the brothers of the order.
Everyone in the order is taught to build and to do electrical and
plumbing work so that they can build up their own missions.

Fr. Gilbert has a little Church, a School, a rectory of three rooms, the
front room of which is used for catechism classes. Now they are building
a dispensary and store and meeting rooms. Right now there are two
sisters teaching in the school where the attendance is only for four
months of the year, and then only a few days a week. If the weather is
bad the pupils do not come. If there is work to do, they are absent.
Most families work from sunup to sundown from the time the ploughing
begins in February.

We visited all the first day I was there. We visited the McLinden
plantation too, which isn't as large as that of Patterson, but which is
rich bottom land along the Chatahoochie river. McLinden, so the
neighbors say, is making a fortune fattening hogs and he gets all the
slop he needs from Fort Benning, which is just across the river. There
are sixty families living on his rich five thousand acres and their
houses were the worst of all. You could see through roofs, through
cracks in the walls. The stairs up to the rickety porch were in decay,
the houses sagged.

Living Conditions
===

One old woman, Neecy, over seventy, lived all alone in one of these one
room shacks, with a leaky roof, with rheumatism so bad she could
scarcely get out to cut the wood she needed to keep warm. There was
nothing in the house for her [to] eat the morning we got there. Father
Gilbert brought her rice and fat back. She had nursed McLinden's
children, Fr. Gilbert said. Now she is going cold and hungry in her old
age under his very eyes. There is worse he could do, of course. He could
dispossess her. She showed me her good "kivers" that kept her warm at
night she said. They were so clean, so ragged. It struck me specially,
how clean most of the beds were, neatly made, blankets and even sheets
spotless, in such hovels that in the north animals would not be expected
to live in them.

Down the road lived Bee with nine children and no man around to support
them. She was still nursing the youngest as she worked in the fields for
fifty cents a day, and she was docked five cents for taking time off to
nurse her baby. I can scarcely believe that myself, but I got it on good
authority. (One old woman in Birmingham, who had been a slave, assured
us that the first job she had as a little girl was to lie across the
foot of the bed of her master and mistress and keep their feet warm. I
found that hard to believe, too, but the story is indicative of the mood
of the Negro.)

Race Feeling High
===

Race feeling is high in the south, and when articles such as this are
published, we are blamed for fomenting it. People like Fr. LaFarge, who
work for the Negro in the north, are blamed, too, for this growing
conflict. Down around Fort Benning northerners and the army are blamed
for giving the Negro high pay and "taking him out of his place." Colored
women won't work for white women any more and no help is to be had in
the fields, thanks to the high wages in the cities.

"We always take care of our niggers," is the expression. "They get into
trouble and we get 'em out. They go to jail and we pay their fines and
get 'em out. We know how to treat them and we want the northerners out
of here."

And there's rumors of the Klan rising again in Alabama.

When they talk about getting "their niggers out of trouble" or paying
for their operations, their "masters" fail to state that repayment is
exacted to the uttermost farthing. A cow or donkey is taken in security
or a family is enslaved for years. To get a man to work, often it is
necessary to pay a price for him, seventy-five dollars or so,
indebtedness to his former landlord.

Housing Needs
===

Someone once said that shoes and paint are what are needed in the south.
I would say housing. Moral conditions and health conditions are bad on
account of the housing.

We visited some of the families who worked hard and long and whose
miserable shacks were clean as hand could make them. There was the
Thornton family, for instance. Fourteen of them in two rooms. The baby
was named Moses, and one of the children Roosevelt. (As I passed block
after block of model housing for the Negro in all the cities of the
South that I visited I, too, blessed President Roosevelt. Many a child
is named after him in those houses). But there are no houses in the
rural sections of the country, and where rural houses have been
suggested as in Horse Creek Valley in South Carolina, the plans were for
city dwellings. When criticism was made the projects were dropped.

Yes, these people work hard. When the children get to school they show
themselves to be as bright as white children. In many a section they are
even healthier.

Know How to Eat
===

Certainly, they know how to eat. They raise their half acre of cane and
in September there is a fine time of syrup making and every family gets
their sugar syrup for the winter. They raise corn and it is ground as
they use it at a communal mill where the Brothers are. They have a few
hogs for fat back, a cow perhaps if they are well off, and they raise
collard greens and turnip greens. There are fresh figs growing in
abundance in this section and plenty of blackberries. But, of course, no
canning is done for lack of equipment and you never hear talk of drying
fruit as you do in Italy. There are also pecans for food. There is good
lumber, pin oak, scrub oak and pine. In spite of the poorness of the
soil there is a good living for the hard working and only a few months
of cold, but many months of stifling heat.

Little Ownership
===

But there is little ownership and the responsibility which goes with
ownership. The people might as well be living like gypsies or nomads in
tents, for all the comfort of the housing.

President Roosevelt has brought them schools and roads and some
electrification. There's been many a WPA project and local people have
been allowed two dollars a day for helpers, but have paid them one
dollar and then charged fifty cents a day for transportation.

"They don't know what to do with their money when they have it," they
say, referring to the Negro. "They just blow it."

Which, of course, is what our modern advertising men and newspapers, and
movies, and radio, and schools have taught people to do.

After all, you can't buy a house and a few acres on fifty cents a day or
two dollars a day.

(The account of this trip will be continued in the next issue.)
