% Day After Day - Jul Aug 1943
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July August 1943, 1, 3.

*Summary: Notes from her date book about visitors, talks attended and
given, meetings, and visits to friends. (DDLW \#394).*

We last went to press June 23, and looking through my date book to find
out what has been happening since then, I find I spoke on the 24th at
the Yorkville Vocational High School, at their graduation exercises, and
was happy to see a goodly crowd of colored and white girls, and colored
and white families, gathered together amicably on this good occasion. I
spoke about cooperatives and farming communes as expressions of our
brotherhood in Christ, and in general tried to convey an idea of the
philosophy of work which is Peter's pet subject.

\*\*
===

July 1-Father Joseph Woods of Portsmouth Priory happened in, and since
he is stationed for the summer at Malvern, Long Island, we immediately
asked him to give us weekly talks in the dining room of St. Joseph's
House. The talks have been crowded, though the nights have been
sweltering.

\*\*
===

July 2-Jack Thornton, who been in charge of the House of Hospitality for
the past year, reported for his physical, since he is going into the
army as an "objector" (l-a-o). Immediately after being accepted he went
to Pittsburgh with Dwight Larrowe for his retreat.

\*\*
===

July 4- Catherine Lahr was visiting from Philadelphia, and, both of us
longing for the sight of the sea, we took a street car ride to Coney
Island in the afternoon; walked along the ocean, had a supper of hot
dogs and sweet corn and came home refreshed.

\*\*
===

July 8-Mary Chesckette, who used to take care of the Day children when
they were all under six and lived at Bath Beach, paid a visit. She
informed me that she took me to a Catholic church once, and I pestered
her by staring everywhere. No recollection.

A Cleaning WAVE

\*\*
===

July 10-A neat bit of propaganda for the WAVES was put over. A friend
and reader of the paper, Miss Watson, came and helped us for the day,
and her help took the shape of scrubbing the back two offices. Fr,
Duffy, Charles O'Rourke and David Mason, who inhabit these quarters,
were dispossessed for a good part of the day. Everyone went around
saying, "It hasn't been cleaned in such fashion since Joe Zarrella was
around." She was not in uniform, of course, and it was her day off. When
she went, looking as sweet and clean as when she had started in, she
carried with her a copy of Raissa Maritain's We Were Friends Together.

Sunday, July 11-C. Lahr and I visited the Cenacle for half a day of
recollection, hearing several conferences from Fr. Moore, from Anselm's,
Washington. Very good, indeed.

\*\*
===

Monday, July 12- I spoke at Friendship House on Negro conditions in the
South as I saw them last winter, and ended up talking of retreats and
the use of the weapons of the spirit.

\*\*
===

Thursday, July 15- I started out for Rosewood Training School, outside
of Baltimore, where the Association of Catholic Conscientious Objectors
has one of its two camps. The other is at the Alexian Brothers Hospital,
in Chicago. After getting off**the train in Baltimore one takes the
Pimlico streetcar and then a bus which goes past a road which leads to
the school. I am writing about the school on another page of the paper.

\*\*
===

Saturday, July 17- A conference of the Association of. Catholic
Conscientious objectors was held in Washington, at Pilgrimage Hall, near
the Franciscan Monastery. It is a lovely place to hold such a meeting.
We had lunch there. It was quiet, and all around the heat shimmered and
the birds were still, and the grass smelled fresh and sweet outside the
windows.

The following week was the week of the retreat, one day's notes of which
are contained on pages four and five.

\*\*
===

Sunday, July 25-Was spent on a picnic thirty miles out of Kittanning,
Pa., with Fr. Hugo and his genial pastor. Taking the All-American bus
that night out of Pittsburgh, I arrived in New York at ten in the
morning, somewhat dizzy from lack of sleep. We had had one of these
jaunty bus drivers who react to pretty girls in the front seat. At each
rest stop he treated her to Coco-Cola, and after each stop he leaped
into his seat as into a saddle, and we galloped at a most alarming speed
around turns, up and down hills, so that I clutched my rosary and held
my breath. (A communist friend once said to me: "Here you believe in
eternal life.. and see how nervous you are about cars! And I who believe
that life ends at the grave-" At this point a passing car took the shoe
off his foot, which startled him somewhat.)

\*\*
===

August l-Was the annual farm meeting at Upton, Massachusetts, so, after
being a week in New York, off I went in another bus to Worcester and
Upton, walking three and a half miles from the station to the
hundred-acre farm, where Mary Paulson and her baby (Teresa was there
helping and vacationing) and Frank O'Donnell and his wife and six boys
are living. There was a goodly gathering, picnicking on the lawn, both
lunch and supper, picking blueberries, and visiting. There was a
multitude of children. Peter Maurin and Bob Sukoski, of the Alcuin
Community, who had traveled all night to reach the farm, fell into bed
by eight, as soon as the fire-flies began dancing over the fields.
