% Notes By The Way - May 1944
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1944, 1, 2.

*Summary: Delights in the wedding of her daughter Tamar to David
Hennessy at the Easton farm. Notes the sad loss of goats to wild dogs
but reaffirms the worth of life on the land. (DDLW \#400).*

Just as in Lent and Advent there are Gaudete and Laetare Sundays, to
ease the strain of the self discipline of those holy seasons--so in the
midst of "my year," there has come an important and joyful interim, to
prepare for and celebrate my daughter's marriage to David Hennessy,
bibliophile, roofer and farmer, and these last two years a resident of
Maryfarm, Easton, Pa. The nuptial Mass was celebrated at eight o'clock,
April 19th, at St. Bernard's Church, by Father Holahan, and later Father
Magee and Father Gibson were honored guests at the wedding breakfast at
the farm.

The young couple will make their home on two acres there. Guests at the
wedding included the mother and three of the sisters of the groom, the
mother of the bride: Peter Maurin, Mr. and Mrs, Stephen Johnson, David
Mason, Arthur Sheehan, who was best man; Maureen Egan, Tamar's former
roommate at Farmingdale, who was bridesmaid, and of course the neighbors
on Maryfarm were there. John Filliger cooked the wedding breakfast. It
was a beautiful, sunny day after much rain. A kind neighbor who had come
for the loan of a horse and plough, gave us the use of his car for the
morning, a most kind and unusual favor.

The church is 3 miles away and the hills steep. All of us were already
breathless with excitement, so we were glad indeed for this convenience.
The bridal gown and veil were made and embroidered by Mrs. de Aragon,
mother-in-law of the bride's uncle, and the bride looked beautiful
indeed. Thank God for brides and weddings and growing things for spring
and resurrection! Alleluia!

Feed My Goats
===

The first words of the bride as she got in the car after the Mass was
''I must get home to feed my goats!"

Which brings us to one of the sadnesses which seems to be inseparable
from the joys of this life.

My diary for the previous Friday reads:

A beautiful sunny day. Leaving Tamar to white washing and painting, I
went up the hill at eight-thirty to stay with the children, Eve's two
and Helen's ten months' old Celia, whom Eve is taking care of for a
time. Eve and Victor had a bit of business to transact in town which
they needed to do together, so I had said I would spend the morning with
the children.

I stopped on the way up to rest, sitting on the hayrake which stood out
in the field by the side of the road to read Matins and Lauds while I
rested. These hills are steeper than I remembered them. I had seen
Victor leading the goats up the furthest hill as I reached the brow of
the hill between the two farms, so I knew I had time.

When Vic and Eve left half an hour or so later, the children were all
fed and in their carriages in the sun, and little Catherine was running
around with the chickens. I had no sooner settled to write a few lines
in my note book when Father Magee (pastor of what used to be the Syrian
church in Easton) came up for a visit. Peter Maurin soon followed and as
they sat and drank "wheat coffee" which Victor calls "satzy," they
talked of Benedictinism, the rural life movement, authority and freedom,
while I sat and practiced holy silence though I felt like bursting in
with disagreements as well as concordances now and then.

Eve and Victor were back within two hours and Tamar came up with
them--also the professor, and in two jerks of a lamb's tail (as my
mother used to say) Eve had a delightful lunch on the table. There was
red bean soup, whole wheat bread and dandelion salad garnished with raw
carrot.

Bread for the Wedding
===

Eve is doing marvelously and her tiny room in the barn is snug and as
homelike as a cabin in a ship. It is amazing how many can be
accommodated for lunch. Peter, the Pro., Eve and Vic, and Catherine,
Tamar, Celia and I. There is a crib at the head and the foot of the bed,
and a big box has been turned into another crib, by the side of
Catherine's, for three months' old Margaret. Aside from the bed and
cribs there is just room for a bench and table, two chests and the
kitchen range which has a vast warming oven where even then eight loaves
of bread were rising in their pans. (Eve contributed the bread for the
wedding feast.)

Here in this haven of peace Eve's latest baby was born on a cold
February night. They had tried twice to get to the hospital, five miles
away, but both times it was too soon. Finally Margaret was born at home
with the assistance of the father. Eve was sitting up next morning
writing a letter to her mother.

This week they are moving into the upper farm house, first floor. The
Pro and Peter are upstairs now. In addition to the care of her own two
babies, Eve has the Montague youngest, as I mentioned before (Helen not
being well) and feeding an extra guest all winter and now two or three.
There are also a dozen chickens, half a dozen doe rabbits and young
ones, five goats and three kids.

Tamar and I went up the hill to the highest alfalfa field to see the
goats. It was a dusty gold all over the Jersey fields, and far down
below us the Delaware sparkled in the sun. It winds in a complete and
sharp circle around our Catholic Worker hill-top farm.

After we came down the hill, we worked at housecleaning in the cabin,
which Dave and Tamar are to occupy after their marriage.

Then suddenly in the midst of the bright sunny afternoon, while Helen
and her four other babies, and Tamar and I were resting on a sunny
bank--the bad news came.

Vic arrived to tell us that wild dogs had attacked all the goats after
we left, killed one outright and fatally wounded three others, which he
would have to kill. The scrawniest, poorest goat of the lot was left,
with a little white buck kid, and the buck and doe of our best goat,
only two weeks old. Tamar is nursing these two now, feeding them from
milking battles, and though the buck eats vigorously the doe has to be
coaxed and forced into swallowing a few drops at a time.

I feel so badly for Vic and Eve. They have been taking care of all the
goats for the last winter, going to an expense in feeding them, too, and
now, just when they are productive, losing them. A good milk goat costs
up to \$40. I've seen two goats advertised for \$50 lately in the Rural
New Yorker. So aside from the loss of loved animals, it is a heavy loss
all around. What with all the babies on the farm--there are seven under
five years--it would be cheaper in the long run to have a good cow. But
they cost a fortune these days, too.

Sometimes it seems to us that the Easton farm is productive only in
misfortunes and sufferings, but we all love it. After all, from the
supernatural point of view, suffering is of tremendous value. There the
ground is being worked for the entire movement. We literally, time after
time, water the earth with our tears.

A FARM IN IRELAND
===

It is good to sit down at such a time to read Father Duffy's new
pamphlet, "A Farm in Ireland," which is the story of his boyhood and how
his father and his neighbors managed in their little community to raise
and educate a family on fifteen acres.

St. Thomas Aquinas said that "a certain amount of property is necessary
for a man to lead a good life." St. Paul so emphasized the dignity of
manual labor that though he pointed out that the laborer is worthy of
his hire, still he labored among the Jews and Gentiles, working with his
hands as a weaver and maker of tents, to earn his daily bread. Our dear
Lord Himself spent thirty silent years in the home and workshop before
He went out and taught for three years.

Father Duffy, who has lived and worked with us since 1937, off and on,
is engrossed with the physical details of the good life. This pamphlet
is about the land (though in the last half he discusses the situation of
England and Ireland) . It is about the family on the land, the parish in
a farm community. We have been privileged to have Father Duffy with us,
sharing our poverty on Mott street, eating there at St. Joseph's house,
saying Mass down the street at Transfiguration Church, confronted daily
with breadlines even in war time, when the unemployables, the lame, the
halt, the blind are sharing his room with the sick and unfortunate,
suffering the cold, the dirt, the confusion of the slums.

Many have asked us about Fr. Duffy, so I am glad to be able to point to
this pamphlet, "A Farm in Ireland," which gives a brief sketch of his
background.
