% Msgr. Barry O'Toole
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1944, 6, 7.

*Summary: Eulogizes Msgr. Barry O'Toole, a friend of the Worker since
its origins. Remembers him as a talkative teacher, founder of a house of
hospitality in Pittsburgh, and defender of the right to be a pacifist
and conscientious objector. (DDLW \#402).*

In my missal, on a separate piece of paper, there is a list of the dead
for whom I pray daily, and now added to that list is Monsignor George
Barry O'Toole, since 1933 a beloved friend of THE CATHOLIC WORKER. Two
months ago, Arthur Sheehan wrote of his death in the paper and I was
shocked and grieved to see the news. Last month I was busy writing of my
daughter's marriage, so I neglected, as I had wished, to tell our
readers a little about Msgr. O'Toole.

 There are many memories of him in my mind. I can remember one hot
summer afternoon on Fifteenth street--the first year of our
existence--when we all sat out in the backyard where there were a peach
tree, a fig tree, privet hedges, spider plants and petunias to cut the
wet heat with their freshness.

 We sat there on boxes and chairs--the whole office forces--and listened
to Msgr. O'Toole talking about everything under the sun--the Chinese
whom he loved, the poor whose cause he espoused, the state against which
he waxed indignant.
 
 He was a great talker. His eyes would shine, he would laugh loud and
often at his own and others' jokes; he was quite oblivious to
differences of opinion since on some so many points there were staunch
agreements. He did not mind being argued with.
 
 I remember on one occasion when he came in the morning and the talk
went on all day. I went to the printer in the afternoon, stayed out to
dinner and, when I came back, the talk was still going on.
 
 Sometimes he seemed to ignore questions. Yet we soon found that at the
next meeting those questions would come up again and Msgr. O'Toole would
have light on the subject, and would bring with him quotation and book
to illuminate. He was truly a teacher.

Catholic Radical Alliance
===

It was he and Father Hensler and Fr. Rice in Pittsburgh who formed the
**Catholic Radical Alliance**, which was in effect a branch of THE
CATHOLIC WORKER. Peter Maurin had always favored the word *radical.*He
was always trying to get at the roots of things. So Catholic Radical
Alliance it was. It was this group that caused consternation in this
huge industrial area by appearing at street meetings and speaking from
soap boxes. These were the three who called together laymen to start the
first House of Hospitality in a store in Pittsburgh, St. Joseph's House
of Hospitality, with Fr. Rice in charge of it, as chaplain, is the
largest House of Hospitality in the country and occupies what was
formerly an orphanage and it covers almost a block along Tannehill
street, up on the hill above the business section, in the Negro section.
The group moved into it room by room, stunned by its vastness. It was at
this time that he wrote *Christian Wheat and Marxian Cockle*and *The
Liberal Illusion.*
 
 It was not long after this that Msgr. O'Toole went to the Catholic
University at Washington to teach philosophy. It was from there that he
wrote his famous series of articles, *War and Conscription at the Bar of
Christian Morals,*which appeared in this paper. He was not a pacifist
himself, but he held to the right of a Catholic to be both a pacifist
and a conscientious objector to war and conscription. At a time when
other men who had written glowingly on peace were reversing their
stands, Msgr. O'Toole retracted never a word that he had written.

Senate Hearing
===

During the hearings before the Senate Committee in Washington, on the
conscription bill, his was the lone clerical voice in behalf of the
layman. I shall never forget his sturdy figure, standing before the
senators seated impressively around the raised desks above a room full
of dissenters, holding his paper in his fist, and reading with great
emphasis and saying at the end--"Any Question?" His position was not
questioned by senators.
 
 His, too, was the brave voice shouting out the iniquity of our sending
scrap iron to Japan to bomb Chinese women and children to death.
 
 We all of us loved Msgr. O'Toole, and his death is a grave loss. When
any of us go to Washington again it will not be the same place as
before. We ask you, our readers, to remember him in your prayers. May he
rest in peace.
