% Once Upon A Time
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July August 1944, 1, 8.

*Summary: A "fictional" account of priests and workers, those who find
the way and those who are led astray, all figure in this story of "all
of us. . .myself and you." There is Father Joy who dislikes
mortification and detachment. Father Cross speaks of the daily cross and
the text "He who says he has done enough has already perished." We meet
Minimus the drunk, Fabiola, a woman who enjoys find things, and Lefty
who gives up everything for Christ. (DDLW \#403).*

Once upon a time there was a House of Hospitality in a big city. Such a
House is a hospice to care for the poor, the unemployed, the
unemployable, the derelict, the refugee from class war, race war, and
other kinds of war. Once a Bishop gave such a house to a group of lay
people to run, and even a priest to be in charge. Maybe sometime this
will happen again. There are ten or so such houses now and after the war
there will be many more. Before the war, for a time, there were
thirty-two. Many of the men on the present breadlines run by the
existing houses, are left over from the last war. Priests come to these
houses to give instruction, and sometimes give whole courses of
lectures.

Concerning Priests
===

This story is about two priests and about some people. One might say
that these two priests are samples of many priests and the people are
like all of us, in one way or another. So it is no use in trying to
identify them, or to say--this is me. I am writing about all of us,
about myself and you.

Father Cross is half a dozen priests we know. Father Joy is another half
dozen. Minimus is all of us, and so is Fabiola. I use these names
because I do not know anyone by them and neither do you.

One hot summer night, Father Joy and Father Cross were giving lectures
in the house of hospitality.

Father Joy was saying, "we must think in terms of the liberty of the
spirit. Away with this petty counting up of sacrifices, this talk of
*self* sanctification. *Self, self* sanctification!**Bah! Emphasis on
*self*. Let us look towards God who is infinitely merciful. Let Him take
care of the whole matter for us. We do not depend enough on grace. We
lay too much emphasis on our own puny efforts. Let us look towards God
instead of inwards towards ourselves. Let us concentrate on the glory of
god. There is a tendency these days to talk about *self-denial*,
*mortification*, *detachment from creatures*. There is a great deal of
modern piety which is neither Deocentric nor Christcentric, but
egocentric. St. John of the Cross, St. Bernard, both in a way show this
tendency which is dangerous. And there is that very dangerous chapter in
the *Following of Christ*, on nature and grace," etc., etc.

As Father Joy, who was an earnest, serious, saintly priest, tried to
talk of enjoying creatures, increasing our love for all creatures in
God, Minimus staggered through the meeting room, so far gone in drink
that he had to crawl up the stairs to the dormitory on his hands and
knees. He had been greatly enjoying Creature Beer. "There was no harm in
it. Take a little wine for your belly's sake. No sin in one beer. God
put these creatures here for us to enjoy." he murmured to himself as he
heard Father Joy talking so earnestly that he did not even see Minimus's
dejected rear as he fell up the first steps outside the meeting room.

Raised Eyebrows
===

Some of the good visitors who liked to come to meetings at the House of
Hospitality, and always brought food and clothing with them for the
poor, looked at each other, raised their eyebrows and sighed. "What
noble people these are," one was saying to herself, "to take care of
these repulsive human beings, though of course they are Christ (in his
most repulsive guise)."

And still others thought bitterly, "What stupid fools to waste their
time on drunks. That's where my money goes. To the corner tap room. They
contribute to their delinquency by caring for them. Those who do not
work should not eat."

Meanwhile, Minimus, not able to sleep and thinking another drink might
help, stole the suit of a dying man who had just been taken to the
hospital that morning, and staggered out again down the back stairs and
out the side door.

Father Cross was speaking not long after, of the need to deny ones self.
"Take up your cross daily, deny yourself and follow me," "He who says he
has done enough has already perished." These were his texts. "You who
run these houses are in greater danger than others--danger of
self-glorification, giving your alms before men, praying publicly by
going to daily Mass and communion (and do you correspond to the graces
you receive? If not they will be taken from you.) And I don't see much
fasting. Those who waste hours in idle talk, smoke, enjoy a beer now and
then, recreate themselves by going to the theatre and movies, using
cosmetics, reading magazines and newspapers--these are not fasting. They
are contributing to the sum total of self-indulgence in the world and
the corporations grow rich and think up more and more ways to enslave
the proletariat."

Fabiola's Penance
===

While he talked, Fabiola took another cigarette (yes, she knew all about
child labor in Connecticut tobacco fields, and the ruin of the soil in
the south) crossed her long slender legs, bare and colored with tan
makeup, and leaned back against the wall and sighed. "So much emphasis
on petty things--chocolates, cigarettes, cosmetics, modesty in dress.
And meanwhile the world was falling apart and women and children were at
that moment perhaps running through the streets of a city like flaming
torches, or being smothered in air raid shelters, cremated, their
screams choked in their throats." She shuddered as she thought of a
broadcast she had just listened to, of fighting in Normandy, the sound
of the guns which had all but drowned out the sound of the announcer's
voice. Every now and then, at such a broadcast, or when she saw a
parade, a band, a handsome figure in uniform, she felt a mounting sense
of horror and together with it an appreciative sense of her own
suffering. "If I were any more sensitive I could not stand it," she
often thought. She shuddered as she saw a cockroach crawl down the wall.
"Well, I am bearing something of the poverty and dirt and vermin--some
little share of the world's sufferings," she thought.

Some of the fellows at the meeting that night kept stealing glances at
Fabiola's trim figure. She had a lovely ivory pallor, a sweet turn of
the neck, and her dress was low enough to show a slight swell of breast.
The sight of the soft forearm, the bend of the elbow, the rounded knee,
the curved thigh, outlined so softly and smoothly, all this oppressed
the breathing of Minimus.

"Why did God give me these desires? Why did He give me free will? Why
did He make me so that I long for the comfort of a woman's arms?"

If anyone mentioned the Pope and his talks on dress to Fabiola (and she
had heard many an exhortation from the pulpit) she thought to herself,
"How petty of him. These days too! To the pure all things are pure.")

The Joy of Life
===

Minimus had recovered from his drinking, he had gone to confession
(there was no talk of restitution as to what he had stolen). Absolution
was easy. Every now and then he doubted whether it was possible for God
to forgive him over and over again, for these thirty years of his life.
He put these doubts far from him, however, because he was a good
Catholic, and doubts of God's goodness were a sin against faith.

After one of these storms of temptation and sin, repentance, absolution
and Communion, he was unusually sensitive to the joy and sensuous thrill
of life. If he could only always live in this state. He trembled at the
beauty, the goodness of life. He had been lifted up out of the depths of
hell. He was safe. He was not alone. He had companionship in his sin, in
his repentance, in his temptations and weaknesses, joys and sorrows.

"These priests are men just like me," he thought. "They smoke, lots of
them. They drink. They enjoy the comforts of life. And yet God
miraculously preserves them from sin. I wish He'd do the same for me. If
I keep praying hard enough, maybe He will."

Outside in the warm night the children of the slums were dancing in the
streets to the tune of a juke box in the corner saloon. **"Take care of
yourself--you belong to me,"** the song pierced the night over and over
and made the heart ache with longing.

Chinese Charlie was doing a rushing business. Every minute children ran
in for penny candy, for ice cream, for pepsi-cola, for toys, for gadgets
the other children had. "I want, mama, gimme--I must have--mama, a
penny."

Down at the parish church a novena to St. Ann was going on. "I want, I
want. Oh, my God, I want--I long for--I am in need of. . .I want love, a
job that will get me good clothes, a good time, a car. I want to escape
the penalty of this theft, of this fornication. Oh, God, don't let me be
caught. I'll never do it again. Oh, God, don't let this happen to me.
Oh, God, take care of me. I promise--" Inside the church, outside in the
street, it was the same.

"The mind is darkened and the will is weakened," Father Cross was
saying. "All creation travaileth and groaneth even until now. In us
reason is always out of line."

Lefty's Leftovers
===

Lefty gazed with rapt eyes on the round figure of Father Cross. He loved
him and was grateful to him. He had led him out of the land of Egypt and
out of the house of bondage. At one time he used to drive a truck, sell
sandwiches and coffee and doughnuts to the night-shift at the shipyards.
That's how he came across the House of Hospitality. Someone told him to
dump his left-overs there. Always a breadline. At the house he had met
Father Cross with his good news. "Sell all that you have and give to the
poor. Dump out the world and fill yourself with Christ. Be ye perfect as
your heavenly Father is perfect. Sow abundantly and you will reap
abundantly. Whoever gives up house and land and father, mother or wife
for My sake shall receive a hundred fold."

Lefty was a literal soul. In spite of the thanks of the House he knew he
wasn't giving much. He would have had to dump the stale stuff anyway,
wouldn't he? And who wants a hundred fold of sandwiches and doughnuts?
His stomach turned over at the thought. He had nothing else to give, so
he gave himself and his truck. But no thanks, mind you, or you would be
depriving him of his reward in heaven.

Thereafter Lefty slept on an old mattress in the cellar. The rats
scrambled around at night and even occasionally played leapfrog over his
head. He was put in charge of the clothes room and was reviled and
cursed every day by the poor. "He sells the stuff, he does," they
whispered to each other. "He sells it for drink. He gives it to his
pets." When they were in liquor they shouted this to the housetops and
once in a while he was belabored by some longshoreman.

Once when he had a fairly decent suit on himself, he took it off and
exchanged it for the clothes of a man who said he could get a decent job
if he had clothes. The clothes he put on were "walking" and everyone
around the house shunned Lefty for some time. "The poor can at least
keep clean," some of them murmured. "After all, no use going to
extremes. We have to think of the common good." They were just as glad
he stayed in the cellar. For a time he was put on the fifth floor, which
was crowded with twenty men, black and white, young and old, sick and
well.

One night Lefty woke up and thought suddenly, "No one has prayed in this
place. They pray in Church, they pray in the dining room, they pray in
the office, but no one ever prays here." So he got up out of bed and
shook his dormitory mates, one by one. "Get up," he kept saying tensely.
"We gotta pray."

His voice was so insistent that most of them tumbled out of bed thinking
submarine torpedoes had at last hit New York, or that poison gas was
stealing over the city. All but Minimus who had fallen into bed, drunk
again, a few hours before. When the others realized that no disaster was
impending they ceased their "Hail Mary's" and tumbled back into bed,
growling. "Screw-Ball--you had me scared for a minute," and the next day
they complained to the head of the house. "If I gotta pray for a flop
and a bowl of soup, I'll take to a park bench. Religion is the opium of
the people."

Lefty stayed up the rest of the night for the others. And not long
after, considering that he had found the pearl of great price, he joined
the Trappists.

The Temptations
===

Father Cross, not many evenings after, had been talking about doing
things for the love of God. "How can we show our love of God except by
preference? It's not a matter of sense, of emotion, though it is true
that the best analogy used in holy scripture is the love of a man and
wife. Yes, we can show our love for our fellows, by not only loving them
as ourselves (that is the old law) but as Christ loved them. How dearly
we love ourselves! From the time we get up in the morning we think of
nothing but of making ourselves comfortable. Heat and cold, pampering
the senses, eyes, ears, newspapers, radios; the nose with cosmetics and
lotions; the taste with cigarettes, candies, delicate foods, 'taste
sensations,' a few beers. No sin in it, they all say as they drink the
365th^beer that year, or smoke the 3,650th cigarette (that is if
they are extremely moderate in their use of cocktails, beer and
cigarettes). And as to where imperfection stops and venial sin begins,
and venial sin stops and mortal sin begins, who can tell? We all intend
to stop. But suppose a man wants a thrill (he has gotten a taste for it
by jumping out of aeroplanes in this war) and says, I think I'll jump
out of the Empire State building and stop at the 22d floor. Do you think
he can stop when he wants to?"

Down the street, in a little park, Fabiola was sitting on a bench with a
young army man that she was not at all sure she wanted to marry. He had
a bold arrogance and a gentle, insistent hand. He pulled her head down
on his shoulder and with his lips pressed against her hair, he told her
all sorts of things she loved to hear, and his human warmth comforted
that universal sense of loneliness we all feel. The sycamore trees
stirred in the August night, the city sounds seemed far away, a cat
crouched in the grass, a soft, tense shadow, and the street lamps glowed
like moons among the trees. And Fabiola, her senses stirring, her heart
warmed with pity for the youth who was about to go out and meet a foul
death, was in the position of that man who was perched on the top of the
Empire State building. She did not know Father Cross was talking about
her. It was easier to listen to Father Joy, who talked about how hard
life was these modern days! It was mortification just to live. Just stay
in the state of grace; just avoid mortal sin; just make the morning
offering and it would cover everything. And if you fell, well, God loved
sinners. There was always confession. It made her feel comfortable just
to think about it.

But before the night was over her soul was as dead as the man at the
foot of the Empire State building. And she felt dead too, sad and dead,
and she wondered how it had all come about.

Just a Bad Break
===

Minimus too, was dead, in the same fashion. One of his fellow-workers
who had gotten a good paying job, had returned to the House to regale
his former companions with his good fortune. He had left Minimus ten
dollars to give to the head of the House, and Minimus, well started by
the "treats" of his generous friend, had continued on his way. The early
part of the evening he had spent with a blonde, in her room, and later,
in an argument in a tavern he had gotten into a fight. Someone had
insulted the Church. Someone had insulted the Blessed Mother. Minimus
had a brawny arm and in the twinkling of an eye, he had laid his
adversary flat. Who falling, hit his head on the corner of the bar rail
and was killed instantly.

Minimus has come alive again, temporarily, in the state penitentiary and
in the interminable hours in his cell, he often wonders how it all came
about. Say what they may, innocently as he had been carried along by
little and by little, he could not feel like a sinner. He had just had a
bad break. He had just happened to be caught.

Of course such a story as this could go on and on. It is the story we
are all writing, joyful and sorrowful, comic and tragic. It is the story
of how we are all ensnared, in tiny subtle ways, so that we are not free
to do what we would and we seem to do nothing to help the world in its
agony. We can do so little with ourselves, God help us! Lord, that I may
see!

When I write such tales as this, I write from the depths of my own
experience. This is me, and this is you. We are all guilty of each
others' sins. This is literally true. Living as we do, in Houses of
Hospitality, and farms, we know all about each other, and what we don't
know we imagine. It does not matter. There is in all of us the grotesque
missionary in Tobacco Road and there is also Mary Magdalene. There is
Judas and there is Peter. We are of dust, and we are also a little less
than the angels.

And there is Christ in us all!
