% Sow In This Field
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1944, 2.

*Summary: An appeal for money from readers which represents bread,
warmth, and shelter. Says that the poor not only need natural help but the spiritual
nourishment afforded by retreats and days of recollection. (DDLW \#404).*

October, 1944.

Dear Fellow Workers in Christ:

"Our troubles were multiplied; afterward we made haste." That to me is
one of the most comforting lines in the Psalms. Because we certainly are
in trouble now, and as usual at this time of the year we are appealing
to you, our readers. After a year of absence, I have taken over the
paper and the work again, and am once more the mother of a very large
family, and looking for the wherewithal to sustain them, both
spiritually and physically. Again I am saying with St. Teresa: "Teresa
and three ducats can do nothing, but God and St. Teresa and three ducats
can do everything."

"Blessed is he that understandeth concerning the needy and the poor; the
Lord will deliver him in the evil day." And "The poor you will always
have with you," Jesus has told us. In spite of war, the draft,
government support, war industries--there are still many poor, who are
sick, homeless and in trouble, in one way or another. We still have
about nine houses around the country, and there are still seven or eight
farms affiliated in one way or another with the work. And we have come
to understand more, these last eleven years of work, concerning the
needy and the poor--that they need more, far more than food, clothing
and shelter. They need retreats, too--they need the word of God preached
to them. So we have turned Maryfarm at Easton into a retreat house where
we will have week-long and even two-week-long retreats as often as
possible, and weekly days of recollection to "taste and see that the
Lord is sweet."

Often we feel that there is little we can do. But let us do all we can
to lighten the sum total of suffering in this world. We are begging your
help for our work; begging for your money help because money represents
bread, warmth, shelter, and when you are sending us three ducats you are
sending us what has come from your daily toil.

The farmer throws away his wheat, and the more abundantly he sows the
more abundantly he reaps. So we are begging you to scatter in this
field, and show your love for God by the love you show for His least
one.

We are asking this help in the name of the Mother of Fair Love, who
possessed interiorly all riches, and so was the poorest of women on this
earth. And we ask you in the name of St. Joseph, who had to witness her
poverty and probably felt helpless, and inept, and understanding about
why such poverty had to be. And in the name of our Lord Himself who had
no place to lay his head during those years of His ministry. Please help
us. You will find that God will "deliver you," as a result of your love
"in the evil day."

Mary's servant,

DOROTHY DAY.
