% Rescued From Dead Storage
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1945, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: Asked to visit a woman committed to the psychopathic ward of
Bellevue Hospital for an anti-Semitic remark, she recalls harrowing
experiences with the mentally disturbed and tales of unjust
incarcerations in psychiatric hospitals. These memories, plus an
unpleasant encounter with one of Bellevue's doctors, prompts her
interest in studying Belgium's decentralized methods for dealing with
the mentally ill. (DDLW \#410).*

During the month a lawyer whom I had met only once before came to me at
Mott Street and told me of a woman confined to the psychopathic ward at
Bellevue for observation, who had been picked up in a restaurant for
speaking abusively of the Jews. He wanted to know if I would go to see
her, as her relatives were hundreds of miles away, and had not as yet
gotten into contact with her. As we are spiritually Semites, and all of
us children of Abraham, going to visit this poor woman was in the nature
of going to visit an enemy in trouble. Having known of some unhappy
experiences with the same psychopathic ward of Bellevue hospital, I
readily agreed.

The sad experiences were these: On one occasion our friend Tim O'Brien,
now overseas, well known to our readers as writer of many of the Ben Joe
Labray articles, and other things for this paper and the Commonweal,
collapsed from the heat in a sub-basement of Child's. When he came to,
he found himself in the psychopathic ward and it took him several days
to get out.

On another occasion, it took me some time to rescue a Mrs. Deane who had
stayed in our House of Hospitality, who was attacked on her way home one
night and who on her making a complaint to the police, was kept for
weeks at Bellevue in this same ward, and only because we went to court
for her, escaped being confined.

\*\*\*
===

Another experience is that of our friend John Ferguson, who died last
month, and who had been with the Catholic Worker for some years. He had
worked as night watchman and occasionally he "celebrated," as the saying
is. On one occasion he rolled off the dock where he was watchman, and
was rescued and brought to the hospital, and from there sent to one of
the mental hospitals out on Long Island. He worked there for three
years, without pay, virtually a prisoner, and it was only after he had
been able to get some clothes which did not distinguish him from
visitors that he was able to walk out one Sunday afternoon and found his
way to us here on Mott Street. He told us his history afterward when he
was trying to get his old age pension. Not being able to account for
those three years of his life, he knew he was going to have a hard time
getting his pension. He was with us for years and we never saw any
indication of mental or nervous trouble.

The last experience we had was strangest of all. There was a
shell-shocked veteran of the last war living with us and helping us in
the kitchen. He usually washed dishes, and hung around the kitchen, and
on two occasions when an argument came up as to the war, he became
violent, throwing one man down stairs and another almost through the
window. Not long after, he threatened Arthur Sheehan, the meekest and
gentlest of men, and that Summer noon suddenly tore the crucifix from
the wall of the kitchen, threw it in front of Arthur and seized a knife.
A tragedy was narrowly averted and we called the police, explaining the
circumstances to them. They took him away, only to have him return to us
the next morning! I went again to the police station, complained, and
demanded that he be given needed hospital care. After many protests, the
police called an ambulance again and had Harry taken away. Within thirty
days he was out again, although I wrote to the doctors in charge of the
psychiatric division of Bellevue Hospital and explained the whole
situation to them. They ignored my letter and released him; this man who
had made an attempt on the life of another.

\*\*\*
===

These experiences will explain my complete lack of confidence in this
division of Bellevue Hospital and my readiness to visit the woman whom
we will call Miss Jones.

When I went to see her it was in the capacity of a social worker, and
since she had never heard of the Catholic Worker, I explained our work
as social work. (Social workers are privileged in being allowed to visit
prisons and hospitals without observing the regular visiting hours.)

While I was visiting the patient and talking to her of her situation,
and trying to find out whether her sister would be able to reach her and
rescue her before she was sent out on the island, a doctor came in whom
I later found to be Dr. Frank J. Curran, senior psychiatrist and
assistant professor of the New York University School of Medicine. His
manner was so brusque, so rude, that it did not seem possible to me that
he was a doctor. He threw a paper on the table before us, and said:
"Your case will come up for trial tomorrow morning and it is my
intention to recommend that you be committed to a mental hospital."
There was an edge in his voice and a harshness in his tone which I
thought ill fitted a doctor supposedly treating mental patients. If it
was true that the woman was mental there was no sense in getting angry
at her. She should be treated with sympathy and consideration. Granted
that she was irritating, had prejudice and an ugly manner of talking,
that she disagreed with the administration of government and thought the
Jews were running everything, still I could not see, from my talk with
her, that this point of view should be punished by her being sent away
to a mental hospital

(I remembered our friend John Griffin, who had been transferred from the
tubercular hospital on Welfare Island to the psychopathic ward because
he had quarreled with the help and complained about the food. Our old
friend Hergenham, who wrote a few articles for us about conditions in
the Municipal Lodging House, had also been threatened with the
psychopathic ward for criticizing conditions.)

I am not so much criticizing our hospitals themselves (though we may do
that in future articles) as the attitude of mind of such doctors as Dr.
Curran, and whoever else were in charge at the time these incidents that
I am talking about occurred.

The reason I consider the situation dangerous is because after the war
there are going to be many more cases, hundreds of thousands of cases,
of young men who are apt to be sent away into a confinement worse than
death. They are going into those gigantic warehouses for dead storage,
as one of our friends calls them, and there be neglected and forgotten
unless their relatives are warned beforehand. If they fall into
melancholy and despair at the situation in which they find themselves,
it will be all the harder to get them out, no matter how close the
relative.

Anyone who has ridden on the Long Island railroad out as far as Lake
Ronkonkoma has seen these huge ghastly warehouses, reaching up to the
sky out of the desolate wastes of pine lands, where men and women are
confined to sit in rows along the wall, with nothing to do, to brood
their lives away (or else, if they are energetic, made to work for years
without pay in the kitchens or wards, doing hard work that attendants
are paid to do).

We are happy to say that the unfortunate woman who had been suffering
from the revenge of the anti-anti-Semite, who is just as virulent and
venomous as the anti-Semite, and who by hatred increases that hatred,
was rescued by her sister and released not only from the prison ward of
the Bellevue psychiatric division but from Jefferson Market court, where
the case against her was dropped.

Today, as I write this, I received a letter from Ossie Bondy, former
head of the Windsor, Ontario, House of Hospitality, who is now in
Belgium. He has been overseas since the war started, in the medical
corps, and he promises to send us an article on the Gheel system of
boarding out mental cases to private families. Having heard of this
wonderful "decentralized" system of taking care of mental and nervous
cases, we are most anxious to get an article on the subject, knowing
well that if we publicize these ideas enough, many a life will be made
happier thereby.
