% Notes By The Way - October 1945
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1945, 1, 2.

*Summary: Some thoughts on death after the sudden passing of a
co-worker. Tells of Workers returning from war, painting chores, and
prayers for conversions. Speaks of wanting to finish a novel that
includes themes from the retreat given at Maryfarm and which has drawn
criticism. (DDLW \#415).*

Last night Jim Eriksen died around one-thirty, of heart failure, after a
coughing spell.

He just lay back on his pillow, closed his eyes and was gone. Joe
Motyka, who was his roommate, ran to get Gerry, and by the time they got
back he was dead. He was forty-two years old and had just been back the
last month from overseas. The night before he died he worked until
11o'clock in the office, lettering envelopes to contain the stickers to
mail out the paper. He didn't want to go to bed until he finished it, he
said. And then, not feeling well, he stayed up a while longer
acknowledging some of the answers to our appeal. Many of you who
answered us and received cards, neatly typed, and postmarked October 12,
will be receiving the last words of

Jim Eriksen, telling you that we of the Catholic Worker were grateful.

He died last night; his body was taken away this afternoon before the
soup line started at 4:30. Duncan was helping in the kitchen, and then
after supper, he took up where Jim left off last night and sat down to
share the job of answering our friends. I went out to the kitchen to
make fudge--not a good time to do it, but Gerry wanted to mail it to
Jack Thornton for Christmas and the package had to get off before Monday
and there was no time Friday or Saturday. Dave Mason and Herb Welsh
shelled the nuts, and Shorty found me pans and wooden spoons and Chu
kept washing the pots and we listened to the symphony while the fudge,
made of brown sugar and milk, boiled on the stove.

The symphony was Tschaikovsky's Fifth, the Pathetique, the same one my
brother and I listened to while we waited for his wife to have her first
baby. Such music to accompany our thoughts of life and death. Struggling
we come into the world, struggling we go out. Duncan came in and said he
could not work, he could not stop crying. We cry for ourselves, we told
him, not for those who are gone. This life is a darkness compared to the
life to come. Now we are in the womb, Fr. Ehmann says. We are going to
be born to eternal life, and there is all eternity before us, forever
and forever and forever, as St. Teresa used to like to say.

All the beauty that is here, all the beauty of music, of sweet flowers,
lovely smells and sights of sunsets and autumn trees and babies
laughing, and women loving, and men strong in spirit--

these are such samples of the light and freedom and joy to come. Why do
we weep?

Arrivals
===

Tom Sullivan, formerly of the Chicago Catholic Worker, is staying here
for a while, just back from the Pacific. Jack English, formerly from the
Cleveland Catholic Worker is staying, too. Gerry Griffin is back for
good now and in charge of the house. That will give Dave Mason more time
for writing, makeup, printing, and a good deal of that work can be done
on the farm.

He used to love the Philadelphia farm and spend a good deal of his time
there. He'll be able to get more to the country now after being tied in
New York for the past three years. Charles O'Rourke beams to see the
gang coming back, and Father Duffy keeps thinking his labors are going
to be lightened, but somehow they never are.

Thanks to such a crew around, there has been a lot of painting going on.
The office is painted throughout. Also the front of the building painted
green. The halls are washed, and part of the rear house painted red. The
back fence is a brilliant green. We begin to look festive, and by the
time Christmas is here, we'll probably have Christmas trees blooming in
the back yard.

What I've always wanted is ailanthus trees.

Next?
===

Looking over an old notebook, I find this: Rogation days, May, 1944.
Prayer for conversions: Budenz, Minor, Mike Gold, Bridges, Curran,
Lawrenson, Smith, Quill, Hathaway,

Browder. Well, the first is taken care of. I don't know why I picked
just those and no others. I have other much longer lists. Bob Minor,
someone very nice whom I worked for in Chicago a brief period, is next
on the list.

Book Reviews
===

And now that people are coming back from the war, maybe we'll have time
for a few book reviews in the paper. It is so wonderful to get all the
books and so hard to write good reviews.

Longmans Green, 55 Fifth Avenue, has been sending us such books lately
that we can only beg our readers to get their catalogues and go on a
spree of buying. There is a new book of Father Gerald Vann, Raissa
Maritain's *Adventures in Grace,* Margaret Monroe's*Enjoying the New
Testament, Mitri,* the story of Prince Demetrius, by Sargent; *No Shadow
of Turning*, by Kathleen Burton, and many others.

Controversy
===

Some day, perhaps, I shall be able to finish the novel I was working on
when I met Peter

Maurin, a proletarian novel where the hero, in an era of unemployment,
and in flight from the police for his agitation, gets the job of
advertising a clothing store while he walks on stilts in

Times Square. The heroine is likewise idiotically employed, walking as a
manikin, advertising

fur coats in the window of a clothing store on Fourteenth street. The
villain of the piece is capitalism and materialism. The theme of the
novel is unemployment and the solution is decentralization, only to be
achieved by voluntary poverty and detachment from creatures and in this
effort to work for others, to continue to love others in the face of
injury, hatred, war, the only motive strong enough is the love of God.
And to show how this ever increasing love of God is fostered, my idea is
to write about a retreat--for how can we learn unless we be taught, and
the priests are our teachers--and write about it at length, giving my
heroine's retreat notes, which will be simple, fragmentary, enticing.
After all, Aldous Huxley has his novels full of diaries, notes,
ruminations on spiritual subjects. *Eyeless in Gaza* is chuck full of
it.

But it looks as though I'm never going to get a chance to write that
novel, life is so packed

around the Catholic Worker, and one lives with so many people, that it
is impossible to live with people in a book as you have to do when you
are writing a novel.

And yet I want to write about the retreat in a way to arouse people's
interest so that they will write to us for the retreat notes, which we have published, under the title of *Applied Christianity*,

(Imprimatur from the diocese of New York) and for other literature on
the subject.

We don't want too many to be asking for retreats as yet, because we
haven't room for them on the farm at Easton where we have started a
retreat house and we have not enough retreat houses or priests. There
are not enough priests to go around for parish work let alone for
retreat houses. The South is clamoring for them, the missions--oh yes,
there will always be a dearth. What a need for vocations both for the
priesthood and the apostolate!

On one occasion I published a page of retreat notes which I had taken on
my own annual retreat at Oakmont, Pa., and there were one or two letters
of commendation. Fr. Verner Moore said that they were refreshing, and a
young man reading them in jail, where he was confined as an objector to
war, made up his mind to make the retreat when he was released. He made
quite a few retreats after he had served his sentence, and now he is
studying for the priesthood in Montreal. He is a convert.

It would take a whole book to write about this retreat of ours, and that
is why I get so anxious to get at my novel. I think it is an important
retreat, an important *means* for us to show our love for God and our
brother. Here we are engaged in this work these thirteen years, running
a paper, houses of hospitality, farms, living the communitarian and
personalist life. You start doing these things because you love your
brother. You want to serve him. The only way you can show your love for
your brother is by practicing the works of mercy and by trying to change
the social order which makes so many of those works necessary. And yet
one is not helping people much unless one puts them into the way of
helping themselves.

We want to do so much, and we are able to do so little, not only in the
matter of food and clothing, but time and loving kindness. We want truly
to give the best we have, and so we want to share this retreat which has
brought joy to our hearts.

Unfortunately this retreat has aroused a great deal of controversy, and
the published retreat notes have, a year after publication, been
adversely reviewed in *The Ecclesiastical Review*, a magazine which for the most part is read only by the clergy. In addition to the published review there have been mimeographed criticisms circulated around the country.
To answer these criticisms, Fr. John J. Hugo, who wrote out the retreat
notes so that the retreatants themselves would stop passing around their
own too often garbled versions of the retreat, issued a mimeographed
answer of some length.

Anyone who wishes a copy of the notes and the reply to the criticism may
write to us and receive a copy of either or both. The next retreat given on the farm
will start the Wednesday evening Nov. 21 before Thanksgiving, and last
through Sunday evening. Make your plans now.
