% Atom Bomb And Conscription Still Issues To Be Faced
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1946, 1, 2.

*Summary: Condemns further atomic bomb testing and quotes the *New York
Times* concerning a resolution supporting this view recently introduced
in the Senate. Likewise opposes conscription (the draft) and its
extension when there is no war as usurpation of authority regarding the
destiny of the individual. (DDLW \#422).*

When we said in our February issue that we believed the proposed atomic
bomb tests should be abandoned, a friend asked whether we thought we
could sweep back the sands of the sea. His question implied that we were
undertaking an impossible task, expressing opposition to inevitable
events.

We must admit that what our friend said seemed to be true at the time.
As a matter of fact, our editorial ("Stop That Bomb Test," Feb., 1946)
stated that we did not expect our small voice to have any effect on the
course of events. We were simply putting ourselves on record.

That opinion remains unchanged today, but things have happened in the
intervening two months which tend to show that perhaps our position is
not so untenable after all. The rising tide of opposition by scientists
to military control of atomic energy is one of the most important things
that have happened. It is also one the most encouraging things.

Postponement of the tests last week by President Truman is also of great
importance because it is an indication that abandonment may be
contemplated.

The latest and most significant development as we go to press is the
introduction of a resolution in the United States Senate proposing
abandonment of the tests. The New York Times (March 30) reports on the
introduction of the resolution as follows:

Outright cancellation of the two projected atomic bomb tests at Bikini
Atoll this summer went suddenly and intensively under Senate debate
today (March 29) when a new member, Senator James W. Huffinan, Democrat,
of Ohio, introduced a resolution to request President Truman to abandon
the experiments on the surface targets.

The measure received prompt endorsement from Senator David I. Walsh,
chairman of the Committee on Naval Affairs, which recently approved
legislation authorizing the use of an estimated \$425,000,000 of naval
craft in the tests. The House already has passed this measure.

"I see no objection to the resolution," Senator Walsh said.

"In fact, I think it is desirable that the Senate and the President
should reflect further upon whether it is wise to proceed with the
experiment, and I think perhaps it is very wise for the Senate itself to
take a position in regard to the matter or to inform the President what
its feelings about the matter are."

Mr. Walsh indicated that he might reopen the hearings on the ship-use
bill, which is now on the Senate calendar awaiting call.

Senator Huffman, making his first address to the Senate, attacked the
projected Bikini tests as costly, unnecessary from a scientific
standpoint, and as being planned when "this is no time for martial
gestures."...

Andre J. Bethune, Ph.D., a young scientist who worked on the Manhattan
Project at Columbia University, in an article in this paper last month
expressed criticism of the fact that domestic control of atomic energy
is still in the hands of the Army, and said that *the Army can think
only in terms of war and weapons.* Now it is evident that the scientists
have learned an important fact. They know that the control of atomic
energy must not be left in military hands, because the military mind
holds to no purpose but the waging of war, sees no vision but that of
the battlefield. The scientists have made a great forward step in
recognizing this fact and acting upon their knowledge, but they and all
of us must advance further and learn the answer to the all important
question: If military control of atomic energy is morally wrong, is not
the same control of human life a far greater evil?

We believe that the authority to cut a young man off from his normal
life and vocation, to separate him from his family and his community is
of far greater importance than the power to split atoms. It is more
important because it is an interference with the destiny of a human
soul. It is usurpation of authority in the moral sphere, as regards the
individual. Collectively, this power to conscript men for military duty
results in turning the whole world into an armed camp. If you think this
is theory, just look at the world today, and think again. Observe our
own country, where the military authorities are demanding extension of
the draft although we are no longer at war. They will use any pretext,
adopt every subterfuge, to gain their end. And we find ourselves living
in an armed camp.

Christians are not supposed to live in armed camps. The atmosphere of
armed camps is poisonous with hatred, whereas Christians must live in
that communion of love which is the life of the Mystical Body of Christ.
The two states of life are unalterably opposed to each other. We will
take an important step toward true Christianity when we realize this
truth and act upon it.

Many awakened Christians are acting today by signing the Catholic
Voluntary Peace Declaration Act. This act has been printed in
diocesan papers, and in other Catholic publications. Its preamble reads
as follows:

"I hereby declare my goodwill to volunteer for active service in the
ranks of the numerous Catholic Voluntary Peacemakers of all nations, who
have already--even in countries where tyranny of conscience still
refused them legal recognition, and still charged them with disobedience
to Caesar-conscientiously renounced to support conflicting National War
Efforts, to militate instead for an undivided Catholic Peace Effort, and
to raise a vast International Army of Volunteer Peacemakers to Christ
the Pacific King of kings."

You may obtain the entire pledge by writing to one of the following
addresses:

United States: The Ass'n of Catholic C. O.'s, 115 Mott Street, New York
13, N.Y.; Canada: The Catholic Pacifists Ass'n, 2115 Dorchester Street
W., Montreal; England: PAX Society, 78 Bristol Road, Weston-super-Mare,
Somerset; New Zealand: Catholic Peace Society, 39 Forfar Street,
Mosgiel.
