% Love Is The Measure
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1946, 2.

*Summary: In the face of a world in turmoil--atom bomb tests, food
shortages, impending strikes, destitution--an exhortation to "love as
Christ loved, to the extent of laying down our lives for our brothers."
Tells of a priest whose work made him "a perfect fool for Christ." Says
"we confess to being fools and wish we were more so." (DDLW \#425).*

We confess to being fools and wish that we were more so. In the face of
the approaching atom bomb test (and discussion of widespread
radioactivity is giving people more and more of an excuse to get away
from the philosophy of personalism and the doctrine of free will); in
the face of an approaching maritime strike; in the face of bread
shortages and housing shortages; in the face of the passing of the draft
extension, teen-agers included, we face the situation that there is
nothing we can do for people except to love them. If the maritime strike
goes on there will be no shipping of food or medicine or clothes to
Europe or the far east, so there is nothing to do again but to love. We
continue in our fourteenth year of feeding our brother and clothing him
and sheltering him and the more we do it the more we realize that the
most important thing is to love. There are several families with us,
destitute families, destitute to an unbelievable extent and there, too,
is nothing to do but to love. What I mean is that there is no chance of
rehabilitation, no chance, so far as we see, of changing them; certainly
no chance of adjusting them to this abominable world about them, and who
wants them adjusted anyway?

What we would like to do is change the world–make it a little simpler
for people to feed, clothe and shelter themselves as God intended them
to do. And to a certain extent, by fighting for better conditions, by
crying out unceasingly for the rights of the workers, of the poor, of
the destitute–the rights of the worthy and the unworthy poor in other
words, we can to a certain extent change the world; we can work for the
oasis, the little cell of joy and peace in a harried world. We can throw
our pebble in the pond and be confident that its ever widening circle
will reach around the world. We can give away an onion.

We repeat, there is nothing that we can do but love, and dear God–please
enlarge our hearts to love each other, to love our neighbor, to love our
enemy as well as our friend.

This is the month of the Sacred Heart, the symbol of Christ's love for
man. We are supposed to love as Christ loved, to the extent of laying
down our lives for our brothers. That was the New commandment. To love
to the extent of laying down our lives, dying to ourselves. To accept
the least place, to sit back, to ask nothing for ourselves, to serve
each other, to lay down our lives for our brothers, this is the strange
upside-down teaching of the Gospel.

We knew a priest once, a most lovable soul, and a perfect fool for
Christ. Many of his fellow priests laughed at him and said, "Why, he
lines up even the insane and baptizes them. He has no judgment!" He used
to visit the Negro hospital in St. Louis, and night and day found him
wandering through the wards. One old Negro said to me, "Whenever I opens
my eyes, there is Father!" He was forever hovering over his children to
dispense the sacraments. It was all he had to give. He couldn't change
the rickety old hospital, he couldn't provide them with decent housing,
he could not see that they got better jobs. He couldn't even seem to do
much about making them give up liquor and women and gambling–but he
could love them, and love them all, he did. And he gave them Everything
he had. He gave them Christ. Some of his friends used to add, "whether
they wanted Him or not!" But assuredly they wanted his love and they saw
Christ in him when they saw his love for them. Many times I have been
reminded of this old priest of St. Louis, this old Jesuit, when I have
visited prisons and hospitals for the insane. It's hard to visit the
chaplains and ask their help very often. They have thousands to take
care of, and too often they take the view that "it's no use." "What's
the use of going to that ward–or to that jail? They won't listen to
you."

If one loves enough one is importunate, one repeats his love as he
repeats his Hail Marys on his rosary.

Yes, we go on talking about love. St. Paul writes about it in
1 Corinthians 13. In The Following of Christ there is a chapter in
Book III, Chapter Five. And there are Father Zossima's unforgettable
words in *The Brothers Karamazov*–"Love in practice is a harsh and
dreadful thing compared to love in dreams." What does the modern world
know of love, with its divorces, with its light touching of the surface
of love. It has never reached down into the depths, to the misery and
pain and glory of love which endures to death and beyond it. We have not
yet begun to learn about love. Now is the time to begin, to start
afresh, to use this divine weapon.
