% Look Upon The Face of Christ
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1947, 2.

*Summary: An unusual midsummer appeal for help. Notes the destitution
around them and hopes the "importunity" of their request will be heard.
(DDLW \#457).*

**LOOK UPON THE FACE OF THY CHRIST**

*Midsummer*

DEAR Fellow Workers in Christ:

Blessed are the poor, Christ said, and now we are very poor. Not as poor
in spirit as we should be but poor with bills hanging over us, and so
many coming with confidence in you, our readers, to be fed. We know you
have many calls made on you, from Europe, from Asia, from all over the
world, but there are our own veterans, wounded morally, mentally,
spiritually, and our veterans of the class war, with their ruptures,
amputated fingers, legs, -- sick brains, sick bodies, sick souls.

There is no end to the needs in work like ours. People go on eating.
Meals come around with appalling regularity. The work in the kitchen
goes on during the long hot summer. The bread line is long again. It is
the very visitors who come in leaving us a bit of their vacation money
who are helping us to keep going. And of course the vegetables from
Maryfarm at Newburgh.

People say, you can't really realize how terrible this is, this
Destitution. In a way, yes, you do get used to it. It is terrible to
admit it, but you do. The first time I saw a bread line with its
homeless ones, footsore, wrapped in rags, my heart turned over within
me.

"You have wounded my heart, my love.: Jesus Christ Himself said, "I have
no place to lay my head." One of the most pointed stories he told of the
poor was that of Lazarus sitting at the door of Dives, waiting for
Crumbs. We are all Dives in a way.

And what if it is their own fault, these poor? What about the story of
the prodigal son? How the Father loved him and welcomed him! We can only
show our love for Christ by our love for these his least ones. Our food
isn't much. We haven't many clothes to give out. But we can keep trying
to show our love, by keeping St. Joseph's house and the breadline going.

This is an extra appeal, a midsummer appeal, a real call for help to
meet our bills. So please think of us as your good friends who knock on
your door unseasonably perhaps; but even though like in the Bible story
you are comfortably in bed with your children (a cozy slum-like picture
these hot nights) you will hear our importunity and open to share what
you have.

In the name of Mary,


