% On Pilgrimage - February 1948
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1948, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: Writing from her daughter's farm in West Viriginia, comments
on the cold and kid's play. Reports on her travels through the
Southwest, Seattle, San Francisco, St. Louis, and Minnesota extolling
the need for supporting the family and a return to the land.
Distinguishes types of anarchism and the need for study. Wants more
priests to have a vision of a new social order. (DDLW \#464).*

Berkeley Springs, W.Va.
---

To write this, I must sit in a cold upstairs bedroom in this old
farmhouse twelve miles from the above-named town which numbers 1,500
inhabitants. Downstairs the babies are rampaging around and if order is
heaven's first law, then it is not a heavenly scene below. But if order
means first things first, then all is well because the two babies,
having a tea party with some of my own good whole wheat bread and some
of our neighbor's blackberry jam, have made a mess of themselves and the
room. Susie waves her spoon wildly and the cocoa falls where it may.
Becky is neat and tidy, but she has a taste for writing, and page after
page of an old note book are covered with neatly lined scrawls and then
tossed to the winds. It reminds me of a selfportrait I saw in the last
number of the *Weekly Review* which Belloc's son-in-law edited, of
Chesterton as a distributist, with everything tossed hither and yon.

More Snow
---


My daughter awaits her third baby--any moment now, and the weather keeps
us anxious. Yesterday it was fourteen below zero. Two days before that a
blizzard raged and the roads were covered so that we could not get to
Sunday Mass. Last night it turned warm and there was the heavy sound of
snow melting and sliding off the roof at all hours of the night. The
neighbors predict more snow, but today the sky shows blue through the
clouds and I look out of my window through the lacy branches of an old
cherry tree to a wooded ridge that is a lavender blue in the distance.
The beauty of the scene from the two windows, and the lovely sense of
space around one makes up for the meager heat thrown out by the old
oilstove at my side. Thanks to a wonderful woolen coat dress which my
friend Catherine Temple of Portland, Oregon made for me for a Christmas
present, I am quite comfortable. It has spacious pockets, in which
Beckie is always hiding things from Susie, so I will dip into them now
for my little note book and try to finish off my travelogue of the early
part of the winter.

Penance
---

My last On Pilgrimage column giving a report of my travel, concluded
with Houston. From there I went to San Antonio, and the bus was crowded
that night so that I had to stand part of the way. (Such occasions are
good practice for persecution. We pray every day for the "freedom and
exaltation of holy Mother the Church" but meanwhile persecution rages in
many countries and it is becoming a common thing to bear once more great
sufferings for the cause of truth. I have read somewhere that one of the
milder forms of torment is forcing the people under interrogation to
stand in one place by the hour. And then of course there are the queues
in England and other countries, not to speak of our own breadline
waiting by the hour for soup and bread. As Irene Naughton said when she
had to bathe one of our women who had come in drunk and vomitous, "Thank
God we have handed to us a bit of penance once in a while, since we have
little strength to do it ourselves.")

Later on when I did get a seat it was beside a young Bohemian girl who
was on her way to spend a long weekend on her mother's farm. She was
working in an office in Houston, had been a Wave during the war, and was
wondering what she was doing in the city, working like a factory slave
before a typewriter six days a week when she was longing for the land.
"All I get is enough money to pay my board and room, lunches and buy my
clothes," she said. "And when I get home to my own room, I am too
dogtired to get out, so I have lonely evenings."

She loved the land and would like to stay on it. And I gathered that she
had not met that kind of man who loved the land in her journey in the
world.

I told her about the Grail school and told her to write to them; on her
G.I. Bill of Rights, she would be able to pay for the year's course
there, and being a good Catholic, as all of her nationality were in that
section of Texas, she would get a view of life as a Catholic that she
had not had before. In general, in my travels I never find our Catholics
questioning our capitalistic urban pattern of life.

State Help
---

One of the reasons for this column lengthening out is that I want to
make so many comments. As to State aid, for instance. We of the Catholic
Worker have never accepted help from city or state, and that have always
tried to make a point of personal responsibility. Nevertheless, as the
Holy Father has said, in times of crisis it is necessary for the State
to give help and relief to the poor, to aid victims of famine, flood,
pestilence or disaster, etc. Our present plight under our capitalistic
industrialism is such a disaster that it is only with the help of the
state that our young people are going to be able to get back on the land
or get homes for their families. As a recent issue of *Life* magazine
pointed out, nothing is done for the family except make a little
allowance for them in regard to income tax. Peter said once that we
should try to have that kind of surroundings in village or country which
make it easy for people to be good. As it is, the family is penalized,
everything is made difficult for them, all industry is geared for
profit, for producing luxury goods, rather than what people need, homes,
food, clothing. Martin Paul, former leader of our Minneapolis House of
Hospitality, former head of St. Isidores farm in Minnesota, said that
the only thing that was making it possible for him as a family man (he
and his wife have two babies now) to get on the land, was the G. I. Bill
of Rights, under which he had a loan, and income to keep living while he
got started. It is a case of failure to help the family all around.
Parents who are able to help, do not give their children the right start
in the way of a trade, homes, a dowry; the church has not helped them
(indeed, they have kept the families in the cities which is the
graveyard of the family) and the state has only helped in the case of
the returning soldier.

Farm Commune
---

For those interested in studying farming communes, the Missions of San
Antonio, which was my next stop, are most interesting. Brother Raymund
Witte, who is the historian of the National Catholic Rural Life
movement, took me all over San Antonio to visit the missions, one of
which has been restored in all its beauty. One is still an active parish
though its buildings are falling down, surrounded by tiny Mexican homes
and acres. These missions were made to house hundreds of families,
besides storehouses, mills, sheepfolds, weaving rooms, and in the
center, the beautiful parish church.

Outside the walls of the mission, the shack towns, the trailer camps are
a sad commentary on life today.

Peter Maurin's vision of a farming commune reminds one of the agronomic
university of early Ireland, the Franciscan missions of the Southwest,
the Paraguay reductions of the Jesuits, the anarchist cities of
Catalonia, and the cooperatives and communes of present day Palestine.
(*Thieves in the Night,*by Arthur Koestler, gives a good picture of the
latter.) All of them presuppose an authoritarian regime voluntarily
accepted. All of them were and are combatted by the modern state, huge
centralized power as it is. All of them were and are attempts to see
God's will being done on earth as it is in Heaven.

Speaking of Anarchism
---

I wish people would not be so afraid of words, such as the word
anarchist. I wish people would study more the early principles on which
our country was founded. I wish they would really read and study and
discuss as the Russian Jews do on the east side in the public squares
and in the cafeterias, not to speak of the way the communists do in
their worker's schools and cell meetings and caucuses. And remember,
these talkers also put in an eight-hour day at work at a machine. "There
can be no revolution without a theory of revolution," Lenin said. To go
on speaking of farming communes, or agronomic universities, as Peter
used to like to call them, we are distressed to say that the type of
people we have attracted to this idea has often been the anarchistic
type in the wrong sense, those who submit to no authority, talk of
property as community property when it concerns someone else and as
private property when it concerns them and their families; who want to
live as members of a religious order and yet as a family; to be priest
and judge, and not a worker; to indoctrinate rather than to toil by the
sweat of their brows; to live off the earnings of others, in a system
which they excoriate. We do not deny that the family needs subsidy in
this present social order. And there are many single ones in the
Catholic Worker movement who are working at honorable jobs, who could be
helping more the family men who are finding it almost impossible to make
ends meet.

The New Order
---

In the coming crisis, of war and revolution, during the break-up of
cities in case of atomic war, farming communes will be a necessity. The
missionary priest all over the world is working along these lines now.
If the priesthood studied distributism as a long-term movement and did
not play two ends against the middle by endorsing the present
capitalistic system, we would be ready for what the future would bring.
Priests as well as laymen have bodies as well as souls; they live and
work through their senses; our problems are their problems. Without good
families there will not be a good clergy. The spiritual and the material
cannot be divorced. Neither can they say, "there is no time for anything
but love," (and is not that the words of an old sentimental popular
song?) as one priest I know did and then proceeded very practically to
have his church redecorated. Priests have a great opportunity to do
these things because they are not "burdened with families," as the
saying is. They have security, their daily living, so that they are not
immediately burdened by bills for the most part. They are the vanguard
who are the first to be persecuted, though often it is true they are
persecuted for upholding the old order rather than working for the new.

And the Cold!
---

I must continue downstairs because now, the next day, it is eight above
zero, and even in the living room one's feet are cold. The children are
on top of me and to continue I must remember Jane Austen, who wrote in a
crowded living room; or Cervantes, in a house full of women with no room
of his own.

There are so many friends I would like to have seen on this trip, but it
was the Alma Savage Lecture Bureau which had arranged my trip, and I had
to go from engagement to engagement, skipping many cities I wanted to
get to. I could not see Karl Her man of San Diego, or Ammon Hennacy of
Phoenix, Arizona. If he had stayed in Albuquerque, where he had lived
for some years, we could have had a visit, because I spent a day there
with Fr. Hessler and Monsignor Garcia, his host, who keeps a veritable
house of hospitality in his rectory. He entertained Claude McKay there
for some time, and regular discussions were a feature in his living room
in back of the church.

Catholic Action
---

It was there I attended my first authentic Catholic Action cell meeting
which Fr. Hessler started, made up of a group of young
Spanish-Americans. To write about this would take a whole article and
certainly would demand more concentration than I can give it here. I
still insist as I did in a former article on The Church and Work, that a
clergy not only informed in the technique of Catholic Action, is
necessary, but one with a vision of another social order than a
Christianized Marxist socialist order which we are tending towards,
upheld by the use of force.

A Brief Visit
---

I spent only a couple of days in Los Angeles where I spoke at the
Immaculate Heart College on the latest Pulitzer Prize winner (which gave
me an opportunity to talk about the Southern Agrarians as a group.) I
spent a few days in San Francisco and Nevada City where I went on
working on the Peter Maurin book.

In San Francisco I spent many stimulating hours with Dr. James Hagerty
who teaches at St. Mary's College which is run by the Christian
Brothers. (I spoke also at Old St. Mary's, the Paulist Church). Dr.
Hagerty and some of his friends have study groups of five couples each,
meeting at each others houses (this demands baby-sitters, and where are
our single women in the apostolate to take this job?). They read and
discuss during the course of a winter. *The Odyssey, Aristotle's
Politics, Confessions of St. Augustine,*and the *Hound of Heaven,*ending
with a Cana Conference. a day of recollection.

The bus trip from Nevada City to Portland was unutterably beautiful,
traveling on a bright moonlight night, through state forests, past
gleaming water falls, through a snow storm. I had no speaking engagement
in Seattle, though all our old group got together for an evening meeting
at St. Teresa's hotel, where I was the guest of Isabel MacRae, who kept
the house going in Seattle during the war. Here again, most of the group
are married and raising families.

Maryhouse
---

I made a long jump from Seattle to St. Paul, this time by train so as to
make an engagement at St. Catherine's. (Some of the best literary
criticism in the country is in *"Books Abounding,"*a monthly sheet
gotten out there). I stayed at Maryhouse for the night and had a brief
visit with the dozen workers there, but did not have time to get out to
their diminutive farm, twelve miles out of the city in Little Canada.
Here is a cell of Christian Living, and a happy place it is. I got to
St. Louis in time to spend a week of Advent in Monsignor Hellriegel's
parish, where the life of the Church in its feasts and fasts is lived in
all its fullness. There the whole congregation sings the Mass, and there
is a schola made up for two score of school children, and there is a
daily homily, and a reading of the epistle and gospel every day by one
of the boys of the eighth grade. Never is there so royal a welcome as
one gets at Monsignor Hellriegel's. There hospitality is practiced in
all its joyfulness. From all over the country priests come to visit this
parish which is half rural and half city (it is Baden just outside of
St. Louis) and the only thing to be desired there is a large hospice for
pilgrims who come to offer adoration, praise, thanksgiving and petition
with all the whole souled fervor that man craves to express where he
loves. Here is indeed a Church! And indeed a pastor!

Church
---

And here too are quotations I have come across recently showing two
aspects of the Church. Newman wrote, "Religion without a Church is as
unnatural as life without food or rainment." And Guardini, "The Church
is the Cross on which Christ is crucified, and Christ cannot be
separated from his Cross."
