% To Die for Love
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1948, 2, 8.

*Summary: An essay and meditation about love in its many forms, human
and divine. Quotes scripture, saints, secular writers, and especially
Soloviev on love. Concludes that the Catholic Worker is " still trying
to work out a theory of love, a study of the problem of love so that the
revolution of love instead of that of hate may come about and we will
have a new heaven and a new earth wherein justice dwelleth." (DDLW
\#470).*

There is a character in *The, Plague,*by Albert Camus, who says that he
is tired of hearing about men dying for an idea. He would like to hear
about a man dying for love for a change. He goes on to say that men have
forgotten how to love, that all they seem to be thinking of these days
is learning how to kill. Man, he says, seems to have lost the capacity
for love.

What is God but Love? What is a religion without love? We read of the
saints dying for love and we wonder what they mean. There was a silly
verse I used to hear long ago, "Men have died and worms have eaten them
but not for love." I have no idea where it comes from. And nowadays in
this time of war and preparing for war, we would agree, except for the
saints. Yes, they have died for love of God. But Camus' character would
say, ''I mean for love of man." Our Lord did that, but most people no
longer believe in Him. It is hard to talk to people about God if they do
not believe in Him. So one can talk and write of Love. People want to
believe in that even when they are all but convinced that it is an
illusion. (It would be better still to love, rather than to write about
it. It would be more convincing.)

Comparisons
---

In the old and new testaments there are various ways in which the
relationship of God and men are mentioned. There is the shepherd and his
sheep. "The Lord is my shepherd." ''I am the Good Shepherd." The animal
and the man. There is the servant and the master, there is the son and
the Father, and there is the bride and the bridegroom. "Behold, the
bridegroom cometh." The Song of Songs, the Canticle of Canticles is all
about love. "Let Him kiss me with the kisses of His mouth."

It is hard to believe in this love. In a book by Hugh of St. Victor
which I read once on the way from St. Paul to Chicago, there is a
conversation between the soul and God about this love. The soul is
petulant and wants to know what kind of a love is that which loves all
indiscriminately, the thief and the Samaritan, the wife and the mother
and the harlot? The soul complains that it wishes a particular love, a
love for herself alone. And God replies fondly that after all, since no
two people are alike in this world, He has indeed a particular fondness
for each one of us, an exclusive love to satisfy each one alone.

It is hard to believe in this love because it is a devouring love. It is
a terrible thing to fall into the hands of a living God. If we do once
catch a glimpse of it we are afraid of it. Once we recognize that we are
sons of God, that the seed of divine life has been painted in us at
baptism, we are overcome by that obligation placed upon us of growing in
the love of God. And what we do not do voluntarily, He will do for us.
Fr. Roy, our dear Josephite friend who worked with us at Easton and who
has been these past two years in a hospital in Montreal learning what it
is to be loved, used to tell a story of a leper he met at a hospital up
on the Gaspe peninsula, the leper complained to him, "how could he
believe in the love of God?"

Story of a Chicken
---

Fr. Roy proceeded to tell his favorite story. First of all there is
dirt, the humus from which all things spring, and the flower says to the
dirt, "how would you like to grow and wave in the breeze and praise
God?" and the dirt says "yes," and that necessitates its losing its own
self as dirt and becoming something else. Then the chicken comes along
and says to the flower, "how would you like to be a chicken and walk
around like I do, and praise God?" and the flower assures the chicken
that it would like it indeed. But then it has to cease to be a flower.
And the man comes to the chicken and says to it, "How would you like to
be a man and praise God?" and of course the chicken would like it too,
but it has to undergo a painful death to be assimilated to the man, in
order to praise God.

When Fr. Roy told this story he said with awe, "and the leper looked at
me, and a light dawned in his eyes, and he clasped my hands and gasped,
*'Father!'* And then we both cried together."

Fr. Roy is a child-like man, and the Russian leper up in the Canadian
peninsula was a simple sufferer, and he saw the point that Father Roy
was trying to make and he began to believe in this love, and to see some
reason for his sufferings. He began to comprehend the heights and the
depths, and the strange mystery of this devouring love. But it still
takes the eyes of faith to see it.

The love of God and man become the love of equals as the love of the
bride and the bride groom is the love of equals, and not the love of the
sheep for the shepherd, or the servant for the master, or the son for
the father. We may stand at times in the relationship of servant, and at
other times in that of son, as far as our feelings go and in our present
state. But the relationship to which we hope to attain, is that of the
love of the Canticle of Canticles. If we cannot deny the *self* in us,
kill the self love, as He has commanded, and put on the Christ life,
then God will do it for us. We must become like Him. Love must go
through purgations.

Love an Illusion?
---

Unfortunately when we speak of the human love of man and woman, most
people, though they hope against hope, still regard it as an illusion, a
great and glowing experience a magic which comes into their lives for
the sake of the procreation of the race. They assume and accept
the**fact that it will die, that it will not last, and in their vain
clutching at it, they will put off one partner and look for it in
another, and so the sad game goes on, with our movie stars going from
the fifth to the sixth bride, and swearing the selfsame promises to
each.

\*\*\*
---

The Best Years of Their Lives had a sad and cynical ending. While one
young couple plighted their troth, exchanged their promises, another
young couple disregarded promises already made and fell into each
others' arms to try to regain, to recapture love once more. Illusive
love!

Vladimir Soloviev writes in *The Meaning of Love* about the need to study
this problem, to seek the growth of this love, so that the force of love
may be set loose in the world today, to combat the terrible force of
hate and violence that we have unloosed. Fr. D'Arcy deals with the
problem in "The Mind and Heart of Love." DeRougement, in "Love in the
Western World," writes also about this work of love. They may be hard
reading for those who seem to learn of love by reading best sellers and
seeing the prize movie. But the very fact that all best sellers and
prize movies deal with this very theme of love make the man of today
turn to such books of these and get down to a study of what is most
vital in our lives.

That most people in America look upon love as an illusion would seem to
be evidenced by the many, divorces we see today--and the sensuality of
despair that exists all around us. But all these divorces may too be an
evidence about love. They hear very little of it in this war-torn world,
and they are all seeking it. Pascal said of love, "You would not seek me
if you had not already found me." Just so much faith is there at any
rate. A faith in love, a seeking for love. It is something then to build
on, amongst the mass of people who have lost God, who do not know in
what they believe tho they believe and seek for love.

And where are the teachers to teach of this love, of the stages of this
love, the purgations of this love, the sufferings entailed by this love,
the stages through which natural love must pass to reach the
supernatural.

We would all like to hear of men laying down their lives for love for
their fellows, and we do not want to hear of it in the heroic tones of a
statesman or a prince of the Church. We all know that such phrases used
in wartime mean nothing. Men are taught to kill, not to lay down their
lives if they can possibly help it. Of course we do not talk of brothers
in war time. We talk of the enemy and we forget the beatitudes and the
commandment to love our enemy, do good to them that persecute us. "A new
commandment I give you, that you love one another as I have loved you."
One said that who did lay down His life for all men.

Life Means Bread
---

Youth demands the heroic, Claudel said, and youth likes to dream of
heroic deeds and of firing squads, of martyrs and of high adventure. But
bread means life too; and money, which buys bread. for which we work,
also means life. Sharing and community living means laying down your
life for your fellows also, and it was of these things that Fr. Perrin,
S.J., the workman priest in Germany, wrote in his moving book.

We have repeated so many times that those who have two cloaks should
follow the early fathers who said, "The coat that hangs in your closet
belongs to the poor." And those who have a ten-room house can well share
it with those who have none, and who are forced to live in a municipal
lodging house. How many large houses could be made into several
apartments to take in others? Much hospitality could be given to relieve
the grave suffering today. But people are afraid. They do not know where
it all will end. They have all gone far enough in generosity to know
that an ordeal is ahead, that the person taken in will turn into *"The
Friend of the Family"* most likely or *The Man Who Came to Dinner.* No use
starting something that you cannot finish, they say, once bitten is
twice shy. We have all had our experiences of ingratitude, of nursing a
viper in our bosom, as the saying goes. So we forget about pruning in
the natural order, in order to attain much fruit. We don't want to pay
the cost of love. We do not want to exercise our capacity to love.

Anecdotes
---

There are many stories one could tell about *Catholic Worker* life, but
it is always better to wait until years have past so that they become
more impersonal, less apt to be identified with this one or that. There
is the story of the sorcerer's apprentice who took over the kitchen this
last month at the farm. There is the story of the "friend of the family"
who tried to stab a neighbor and was evicted by them. Too bad we cannot
write these stories for the edification and instruction of those who are
starting new houses of hospitality today. There is a story now, however,
about a reader of the paper, and this happened long enough ago so that
we can tell it, who adopted a young girl and educated her and the young
girl proved to be a great joy and a comfort. Now she has entered a
contemplative order to spend her life in prayer and work. The same
reader then took in another young woman, who brought home a fatherless
baby, and when that was forgiven her, went out and brought in still
another, and there was apt to be a third, and our friend wrote and
begged us for advice and help as to what to do. Was she contributing to
the delinquency of this girl by forgiving seventy times seven, and was
she perhaps going to have seventy times seven children to take care of?

It is good to think of the prophet Osee, whom I have mentioned before in
an article on love. He was commanded to take a harlot to wife, and she
had many children by other men. He was a dignified, respected teacher of
his people, and he was shamed and humiliated by the wife of his bosom.
Yet he was to go down in history as the type of the love of God for His
adulterous people.

Love must be tried and tested and proved. It must be tried as though by
fire, and fire burns. It is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of a
living God.

In times of catastrophe we are all willing to share. In an earthquake,
hurricane, war or plague, people begin to love one another. Of course,
the wife must consider her husband, but it is not so necessary for the
husband to consider the wife. As head of the household, it is his job to
lead the wife in hospitality, and if he is willing to support others in
need, he should induce his wife to go along with him. He should share
all but his intimate love with others, and that is for her alone. If he
should withdraw that tenderness, that embrace, then he would be guilty
indeed.

The Problem of Scobie
---

What kind of a love was that of Scobie, the Major in the current best
seller of Graham Greene, the love which had turned to indifference, if
not to loathing at times, and which the author felt to be redeemed by
the pity and compassion of Scobie for his nagging wife. How to love
truly a woman after the illusion has passed, and that woman becomes a
climbing, snobbish, petty, self-conscious inferior, and not an equal,
with whom there is no longer any possibility of the love of equals,
which is the love of the canticle of canticles?

Here are some excerpts from Soloviev that perhaps are pertinent. "It is
well known to everyone that in love there inevitably exists a special
idealization of the beloved object, which presents itself to the lover
in an entirely different light from that in which outsiders see it. I
speak here of light not merely in a metaphorical sense; it is a matter
here not only of a special moral and intellectual estimate, but moreover
of a special sensuous reception; the lover actually sees, visually
receives what others do not. And if for him too this light of love
quickly fades away, yet does it follow from this that it was false, that
it was only a subjective illusion?"

. . . "The true significance of love consists not in the simple
experience of this feeling, but what is accomplished by means of it, in
the work of love."

"For love it is not enough to feel for itself the unconditional
significance of the beloved object, but it is necessary effectively to
impart or communicate this significance to this object..."

. . . "each man comprises in himself the image of God. Theoretically and
in the abstract this Divine image is known to us in mind and through
mind, but in love it is known in the concrete and in life. And if this
revelation of the ideal nature, ordinarily concealed by its material
manifestation, is not confined in love to an inward feeling, but at
times becomes noticeable also in the sphere of external feelings, then
so much greater is the significance we are bound to acknowledge for love
as being from the very first the visible restoration of the Divine image
in the world of matter. . . "

A woman wants compassion, not pity, and Major Scobie did not work very
hard at communicating the significance of his love to his wife. Even two
of the characters in **The Best Years of Their Lives** had gone a bit
farther along the path of love when they told their daughter, who was
falling in love with a married man, "how often have we hated one
another!" In other words, what a purgation, what a working out we have
been through together!

(I am consciously and purposely writing with these allusions, so that
those who are not able to read Soloviev but who do go to the movies,
will also know what I am writing about.)

But this will to love may look like a pretense, a hypocrisy. I have a
friend who is married to a man little worthy of respect, for whom she
shows respect and tender love. Another friend who is not a Catholic
says, "How can she possibly feel that way? She is acting a lie." And one
can only answer that she is a Catholic wife, and that she must see in
that husband of hers Christ Himself, regardless of his crime. It is the
folly of the cross.

One wants tenderness, not pity, respect and friendship and not clinging,
doting love. A doting love is an oppressive love; and one sees it in the
love of parent for child, and in the love of one partner for the other.
One revolts from such a love. One wants to "own one's self," "to be
one's own mistress," to escape from such slavery, such serfdom.

But true love is delicate and kind, full of gentle perception and
understanding, full of beauty and grace, full of joy unutterable. Eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard, what God hath prepared for those who love
Him.

And there should be some flavor of this in all our love for others. We
are all one. We are one flesh, in the Mystical Body, as man and woman
are said to be one flesh in marriage. With such a love one would see all
things new, we would begin to see people as they really are, as God sees
them.

We may be living when it comes to such perceptions now, and that desert
may stretch out before us for years. But a thousand years are as one day
in the sight of God, and soon we will know, as we are known. Until then
we will have glimpses of brotherhood, in play, in suffering, in serving,
and we will begin to train for that community, that communion, that
Father Perrin talked so much about in his story of the workman priest in
Germany.

This last month there was an article by John Cogley in America about his
experiences in the Chicago House of Hospitality. He writes of it as in
the dim and distant past, and tells of the "mushroom growth" of such
houses back in the thirties. In the present there are a few still
struggling along, he writes, and a few farms existing in dire poverty.

Yes, the problems have become intensified, a great many have left the
running. Where there were thirty-two houses of hospitality and farms,
there are now eleven. But in those eleven we are still trying to work
out a theory of love, a study of the problem of love so that the
revolution of love instead of that of hate may come about and we will
have a new heaven and a new earth wherein justice dwelleth.
