% *On Pilgrimage* 
% Dorothy Day

April
---
*Summary: Ponders the mystery of the love of God for man and man for
man. Urges readers to come to their farm for a retreat to renew strength
for the apostolate. Express disdain for the Kinsey report on American
sexual behavior and presents a sublime vision of sexual love. Includes
an extensive passage by Fr. John J. Hugo who himself quotes saints,
mystics, scripture, and Church prayers to illustrate how the nuptial
union is an analogy of God's love for us. (DDLW \#479).*


April 10

WHENEVER I groan within myself and think how hard it is to keep writing
about love in these times of tension and strife, which may at any moment
become for us all a time of terror, I think to myself, "What else is the
world interested in?" What else do we all want, each one of us, except
to love and be loved, in our families, in our work, in all our
relationships? God is Love. Love casts out fear. Even the most ardent
revolutionist, seeking to change the world, to overturn the tables of
the money changers, is trying to make a world where it is easier for
people to love, to stand in that relationship to each other. We want
with all our hearts to love, to be loved. And not just in the family but
to look upon all as our mothers, sisters, brothers, children. It is when
we love the most intensely and most humanly that we can recognize how
tepid is our love for others. The keenness and intensity of love brings
with it suffering, of course, but joy too, because it is a foretaste of
heaven. I often think in relation to my love for little Becky, Susie,
and Eric: "That is the way I must love every child and want to serve
them, cherish them, and protect them." Even that relationship which is
set off from other loves by that slight change in phraseology (instead
of "loving," one is "in love") -- the very change in terminology,
denoting a living in love, a dwelling in love at all times, being bathed
in love, so that every waking thought, word, deed, and suffering is
permeated by that love -- yes, that relationship above all should give
us not only a taste of the love of God for us but the kind of love we
should have for all.

When you love people, you see all the good in them, all the Christ in
them. God sees Christ, His Son, in us and loves us. And so we should see
Christ in others, *and nothing else,* and love them. There can never be
enough of it. There can never be enough thinking about it. St. John of
the Cross said that where there was no love, put love and you would take
out love. The principle certainly works. I've seen my friend, Sister
Peter Claver, with that warm friendliness of hers which is partly
natural (she is half-Jew and half-Irish) Â but which is intensified and
made enduring by grace, come into a place which is cold with tension and
conflict, and warm the house with her love.

And this is not easy. Everyone will try to kill that love in you, even
your nearest and dearest; at least they will try to prune it. "Don't you
know this, that, and the other thing about this person? He or she did
this. If you don't want to hear it, you must hear. It is for your good
to hear it. It is my duty to tell you, and it is your duty to take
recognition of it. You must stop loving, modify your loving, show your
disapproval. You cannot possibly love -- if you pretend you do, you are
a hypocrite, and the truth is not in you. You are contributing to the
delinquency of that person by your sentimental blindness. It is such
people as you who add to the sum total of confusion and wickedness and
soft appeasement and compromise and the policy of expediency in this
world. You are to blame for communism, for industrial capitalism, and
finally for hell on earth."

The antagonism often rises to a crescendo of vituperation, an
intensification of opposition on all sides. You are quite borne down by
it. And the only Christian answer is *love,* to the very end, to the
laying down of your life.

To see only the good, the Christ, in others! Perhaps if we thought of
how Karl Marx was called "Papa Marx" by all the children on the street,
if we knew and remembered how he told fairy stories to his children, how
he suffered hunger and poverty and pain, how he sat by the body of his
dead child and had no money for coffin or funeral, perhaps such thoughts
as these would make us love him and his followers. Dear God, for the
memory of that dead child, or that faithful wife, grant his stormy
spirit "a place of refreshment, light, and peace."

And there was Lenin. He hungered and thirsted, and at times he had no
fixed abode. Madame Krupskaya, his widow, said that he loved to go into
the peace of the pine woods and hunt mushrooms like old Mrs. Dew down at
Easton did, and we with her one October. He lived one time in the slums
of Paris, and he lived on horse meat when he had meat, and he started
schools for the poor and the workers. "He went about doing good." Is
this blasphemy? How many people are dying and going to God their Father
and saying sadly, "We have not so much as heard that there is a Holy
Spirit." And how will they hear if none preaches to them? And what kind
of shepherds have many of them had? Ezekiel said in his day, "Woe to the
shepherds that feed themselves and not their sheep!"

And if there have been preachers, has there been love? If people will
not listen, one can still love, one can still find Christ in them to
love, and love is stronger than death. Dear God, may Lenin too find a
place of refreshment, light, and peace. Or don't we believe in
retroactive prayers? There is no time with God.

It is an easy thing to talk about love, but it is something to be
proven, to be suffered, to be learned. That's why we have our retreat
house at Newburgh. Last week after my return from Berkeley Springs, I
went up on a foggy day, taking a train at Grand Central because the bus
which leaves at 6:30 and passes our door at Newburgh was on strike. The
train was slow, and the ferry slower. A fog which kept us floundering in
the middle of the river for half an hour was so heavy that it was hard
to breathe. It was a great relief from oppression to reach the high
ground, where the retreat house stands, six miles inland, and to get to
bed early after the oppression of the city.

It is always a terrible thing to come back to Mott Street. To come back
in a driving rain, to men crouched on the stairs, huddled in doorways,
without overcoats because they sold them perhaps the week before when it
was warm, to satisfy hunger or thirst -- who knows? Those without love
would say, "It serves them right, drinking up their clothes." God help
us if we got just what we deserved!

It is a terrible thing to see the ugliness and poverty of the cities, to
see what man has made of man. I needed those few days at Newburgh to
brace myself for work. Father Anthony, a young Benedictine from Newton,
New Jersey, was with us that week, giving a retreat on the sacraments,
and the conferences I was in time for continued what I had been
pondering of the love of God for man and man for man. "From Genesis to
Revelation," he said, in one conference, "it is the story of God's love
for man. All the story of God's dealing with man is a love story. Some
say the Old Testament tells of God's justice and the New of his love.
But there is not a page but emphasizes God's folly in ever forgiving and
drawing man back to him." I remembered the book of Hosea, the prophet
and holy man who was commanded by God to love and marry a harlot, who
had children by him, and who left him again and again, having children
also by her lovers. And how Hosea again and again took her back. How he
must have been scorned by his generation, he a holy man, so weak and
uxorious, so soft-minded that again and again, "he allured her" to him,
on one occasion even buying her back from her lover, even providing her,
while she was with her lover, with corn and wine and oil. And God even
commanded it so that down through the ages there would be this example
of God's love for a faithless people, of the folly of love, a foretaste
of the folly of the Cross. If we could only learn to be such fools! God
give us the strength to persist in trying to learn such folly.

We had three conferences a day, of an hour each, and a fifteen-minute
period of prayer after each conference. There was silence for the week,
and manual labor, in the house and out. There was rosary after lunch and
a holy-hour midnight on Thursday. Every morning the day began with
Prime, the first prayers of the Church for the day (after Matins and
Lauds), and then there was a sung Mass, the first Mass in the Kyriale
for the festive season, and it was pure beauty that strengthened the
heart to learn to love.

There was just a handful of us there, since we have not begun to send
out our retreat notices for the year. We are urging our friends to study
the following dates and figure out their vacations, and try to plan to
spend some time with us this summer and fall.

May 1 there will be a study weekend on WORK.

Memorial Day weekend there will be a retreat for men conducted by Father
Francis Meenan, Holy Ghost Father from Norwalk.

June 13-19 -- First study week.

July 4th weekend -- A basic retreat for women.

July 18 -- Father Veales, a Josephite from Washington, D.C., will give
a basic retreat for men.

August 14 there will be another study week.

Labor Day weekend -- Father Purcell, an Augustinian, will give a retreat
for families, and there will be several girls to care for the children,
who will have their own little retreat at the same time.

There will be extra weekends and also through the fall, to be announced
later.

We cannot overemphasize the importance of these retreats and beg our
readers to try to plan to come to some of them. While it is true that
love sweetens all of life and makes light of pain and suffering and
brings us to the happiness we all desire, one must learn to love, and
there is no place better than a retreat house to learn such lessons. We
must withdraw for a time to renew our strength for the great struggle of
the apostolate. Without the use of our spiritual weapons of love, which
include prayer and penance and work and poverty and suffering, our
future is harsh and ugly to contemplate. Great struggles lie before us
in this era of war and revolution through which we are passing, and
which we in America have not begun to suffer as yet. We must prepare, so
we do beg you to come and help us. "A brother helped by a brother is a
strong city."

The retreat house, of course, is not just for our readers who can afford
to take train or bus and get to us for this time not only of rigor but
of delight. ("All the way to heaven is heaven, since He said, 'I am the
Way.'Â ") But it is also for the poor, the lame, the halt, and the blind.
We always have a few from our House of Hospitality, and come the summer,
we are also going out on the highways and byways and persuade our
brothers in. There is many a sick one just out of Bellevue or off the
breadline who needs "refreshment, light, and peace," here and now. The
retreat house is for us all, but most especially for those who can go no
place else for lack of funds or because difference in race, color, and
creed has kept them from this sweet rest of a retreat. God will raise up
amongst us all those He wishes to work for Him, and He will give us all
the strength we need for the work we all will have to do.

The farm of ninety-six acres, attached to the retreat house, is going to
provide meat and vegetables also for our breadline at Mott Street. It
was a wonderful sight to see John Filliger out there on the horizon at
the end of a long field, ploughing with his team, and the hound dog
trailing along behind. A number of the fields are ploughed now, and the
greenhouse is filled with cabbages and tomato plants, not to speak of
spring salads. Hans and Charlie and Louis Owen and a new arrival by
[the] name of Murphy are busily at work these spring days, and before he
left Father Anthony blessed the house and the fields. Our chapel has
been greatly enlarged, thanks to Hans Tunneson, and the conference room
floor painted, and we are ready for our friends and fellow workers.

Peter will be taken up to the farm again next week, where for some hours
every day he can sit under the crab apple tree out in front of the
adobe-like house which the men and the priest share. Nothing is blooming
yet, no buds show green, and the wind is still harsh. But the spring sun
is warming, and after the desperately hard winter on Mott Street, the
warmth is a touch of God's love on us all.

Now there is much time being spent in arguments against Universal
Training [and] Conscription, and the fog of threatened war hangs so
heavy over us all. We beg the prayers of all our readers that we may
hold our stand with strong love, with warm love, because without it we
know that all arguments will be unavailing.

April 15

I HAVE just read a review of the Kinsey report, which appeared in the
spring number of *Politics,* that very interesting quarterly which Dwight
McDonald puts out on Astor Place. (I understand they have open nights
Thursdays and intend to go up there sometime.) It was the completest
review I've seen yet. I've not read Father Kennedy's, nor any other
Catholic review, but intend to look some of them up. Anyway, here are
some of the things I was thinking about the book.

In the first place, I remembered how I came across Havelock Ellis's
*Sexual Pathology* at the age of seventeen, in the home of a professor at
the University of Illinois, where I was working my way through --
cleaning, cooking, caring for children -- for my room and board. It was
an ugly shock to me. I had been as knowing as most children, speculating
about the things of sex at an early age indeed. (I can remember talking
about it when I was six.) One might also say that an ugly tide rose in
me, a poisonous tide, a blackness of evil, at reading there so many
things that certainly do not need to be known by other than doctor or
priest, by those who are schooled to bear it and trained to help in
relation to it. Dr. Von Hildebrand writes about the poisonous
fascination of sex, its deadly allure in the abstract. I felt it then in
its most hideous form, and there was no beauty in it, no love, but it
was like the uncoiling of a dank and ugly serpent in my breast. These
may be extreme ways of expressing myself, but I am sure that at times
there has been this consciousness of evil in us all. Evil as a negation,
as an absence of good, as a blackness, a glimpse of hell "where
everlasting horror dwelleth, and no order is."

In physical depression, after illness, or after physical excess, there
are feelings of guilt in us all, I am sure, and even those who deny
there is a conscience feel this. I wonder why that very testimony of
guilt in us all is not a witness against such books as Kinsey's. But of
course, these days they are trying to make people overcome their sense
of guilt, to deaden consciences. When we are little children, our
consciences tell us what is right or wrong, and we know full well when
we are choosing evil. The trouble with the Kinsey report is that it
makes people cease to regard themselves as the least of all, as the
guiltiest of all, as the saints say we should, and instead we say, "I'm
as good as he is," or "He is as bad as I am, in fact much worse." And we
compare ourselves with others instead of with God, horizontally instead
of vertically. Christ said, "Be ye therefore perfect, as your heavenly
Father is."

St. Paul said, "Let these things be not so much as mentioned among you."
And he also said, "Whatsoever things are good and true and beautiful and
chaste, and of good repute, think on these things," and the lesson for
Easter season is, "If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things which are
above." People say, "But it helps you in guiding and guarding your own
children to know these things. You cannot be like ostriches, with your
heads in the sand. You've got to know these things, regardless of how
much they make you suffer (or what they do to you in the way of shock)."

I thought of a paragraph in a book review in *Time* magazine which spoke
of two women who kept an inn at Dunkirk and who, in the thickest of the
war, went .Â .Â . calmly, tranquilly, and serenely about their work,
making an atmosphere of peace in the midst of war and horror, bringing
courage to thousands by their very example. They went right on about
their work in their routine, living as they had always lived, keeping to
their work, and by thus maintaining strength and calm, helped build up a
resistance movement that continued all through the war. They probably
never knew what they inspired in the way of work.

I thought too of a story I read of the expulsion of the Jesuits from
Spain, how they lived on a boat and were rejected at one port after
another, and were years at sea, and still kept to their life of prayer,
penance, and study, running as it were a house of studies in the middle
of the Mediterranean. "We have here no abiding city." They were like
desert fathers, except that they lived in the middle of the sea in their
monastery, which floated about between heaven and earth, seemingly
rejected for a time by both.

And I remembered an old friend, wife of a member of the I.W.W., who
traveled about the country, and in every little room she stopped, she
made a home with a couple of scarves, pictures, a deft arrangement of
furniture and her suitcase of belongings. To live here and now the life
of the spirit, to live as though this dear flesh were not the burden of
pleasure and pain that it is -- this is a great gift and to be
cultivated in our time. "All the way to heaven is heaven," said St.
Catherine of Siena, "because He said, 'I am the Way.'Â " We have too many
samples of hell, and the Kinsey report is one of them.

Yes, we know what is in man. Cy Echele recognized that man is but dust,
as well as little less than the angels, when he wrote this note this
spring:

This evening Margaret and I set up Gregory's first bed. It is quite an
event for a little boy to graduate from the basket and crib stage to his
own bed. What declares his coming dignity more effectively than having a
special place like this allotted for his retiring in the evening, and
for those precious lying-awake hours in the morning, when the gift of
reflection surely begins to come to man? An important occasion calls for
a blessing, and we went to the Ritual to find something appropriate.

In the end I composed a new prayer, adapted from the old, and based on
the style of the collects, which are so beautiful and majestic. I simply
read the prayer and sprinkled the bed with holy water, asking God if He
might bestow a blessing through me, a layman and head of the family.

The words were composed new because we wanted a particular application
on this occasion. The bed was bought with my labor; the mattress and
pillow, the two sheets and pillowcase were made by Gregory's
grandmother, who has provided so much for our physical sustenance during
our eight years of married life.

Here is the prayer:

O Lord, God Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth and of all things, who
has willed that by rest and sleep our bodies are restored to freshness
and a measure of integrity after periods of activity and labor: Bless
this bed which we Thy servants, Cyril and Margaret, have disposed for
the use of our dear son, Gregory. May it be the means to him of Thy
great blessing of health, soul, and body. Guard him also, we beseech
Thee, against all defilements which the evil one may in his stealth
attempt to impose upon him during the hours of peace and passivity of
body. Through this creature, a bed, may he come to Thee, our only true
and lasting God, to enjoy the blessed fruit of a life spent in Thy love
and service. Through Jesus Christ, Thy Son, our Lord, who liveth and
reigneth with Thee in the unity of the Holy Spirit, God, world without
end. Amen.

Every night at Compline we say the ancient hymn,

Procul recedant somnia,  
Et noctium phantasmata;  
Hostemque nostrum comprime  
Ne polluantur corpora.

Our beds may be altars at which we kneel to pray, and on which we
receive the sacrament of matrimony, giving and receiving in a communion
which is a foretaste of the beatific vision, and which *can
be* consummated with recollection and dignity and joy. Or they may be
something else again, to the sardonic and the cynical and sensual, who
in all their talk and writing of sexual play smack more of the goat or
rooster than the lamb. After all, we are not animals, we are men, and as
Eric Gill said, man must ever be more or less than the animals; he can
never be on their plane.

Among the sets of books my father bought for the household and which
included Dickens, Hugo, Stevenson, and Scott, there was also de
Maupassant, which was kept locked away from us children. Of course, we
read him, and I found nothing glamorous or attractive in his stories,
which were frankly fleshly. They contained to me all the ugliness, the
sadness, and the degradation of the flesh, which I saw aging and
corrupting and dying all about me. Children at times are very conscious
of death, of the penalty of original sin. And I think it was in de
Maupassant that I read his lament that bodily functions the most
repulsive as well as the most sublime were bound closely to the same
organs, so that often there was an element of the grotesque in what
should be the greatest and most dignified act of man, when he was
co-creator with God. It is this consciousness that has led to what
people term the Jansenism of the Irish and Anglo-Saxon prudishness in
regard to sex. We know our children are being presented with other
points of view, and it is time indeed that there should be more talk on
the subject of sex and marriage on the part of Catholics.

God knows women have enough of the ugly and the lowly to do in the work
of this world. In their sufferings they see clearly the result of the
Fall. They are closer both to heaven and to hell than men are in a very
literal, material, earthy sense.

I'm certainly not going to read the Kinsey report. But it needs to be
considered and thought about. What people ought to read is Eric Gill's
*Autobiography, The Life of Thomas More --* and here are good books on
the shelf in front of me right now: *The Meaning of Love* by Solovyov;
*The Mind and Heart of Love* by Father D'Arcy.

Here is a letter I received this week from a young mother:

I haven't read the Kinsey report either, but I have read several
reviews, including the one you mentioned in *Politics*.

I do not wonder that it is a best-seller, that people turn to books of
this kind and to Freudian psychologists for help. There is no part of
Catholic doctrine so neglected as the teachings of the Church on sex and
marriage. Not even those on social justice are so unknown and
unpracticed.

There is good and plenty taught on the negative side -- what is
forbidden -- but when it comes to holding up the vision of a holy
marriage with sex as an integral part, to any positive and integrated
teaching on this vital subject, there is a conspiracy of silence, an
attitude of embarrassment and evasion.

Being a product of the Catholic middle class, Irish-American, I know
that tinge of Jansenism well. Sex is shut off from the rest of life,
tolerated in marriage as a necessary evil for the procreation of
children. Instruction is given reluctantly and with embarrassment, and
delayed until adolescence, when the problem becomes impossible to ignore
or suppress. That our parents and teachers did not intend to produce
such an effect I am certain. It arose from a panicky concern to protect
us, whom they loved, from the sins of the flesh. Also, they knew that
sex life fell with the Fall. But it can be renewed by the graces of the
Redemption received in the Sacrament of Matrimony, and this is what they
forgot to tell us or make real to us.

All things must be restored to Christ; our bodies were redeemed too.
Children should be learning healthy and holy attitudes unconsciously as
well as consciously from infancy so that they can fuse the natural and
supernatural in every part of life. The beautiful prayers of the Nuptial
Mass could be studied with profit long before it is time to think of
being engaged.

I agree with you, there is very little of the evils of sex that anyone
needs to know, but kept in ignorance of the good made by God, we turn to
the evil made by man. Coition is grotesque, yes, but then the union of
spirit and matter which makes man is a grotesquerie. That a man should
put food into a hole in his face is grotesque: that is why gluttony is
so repulsive, whether it expresses itself in taking too much food or
"wolfing it down," in fussiness, Epicureanism, or excessive
preoccupation with eating. But who thinks of the grotesque side of
eating when he is taking his food as befits a Christian and a man,
properly, in company, with the object of nourishing himself, that he may
be a better servant to God? And knowing that this eating is a kind of
sacrament, a natural figure of the Agape, of Christ's feeding our souls
with Himself in the Eucharist. Our Lord gives us Himself in bread and
wine. He knows we are flesh and blood as well as spirit, and we need a
visible sign. Yet we eat quite naturally and simply, aware of these
things, although we are not always thinking of them at the moment of
eating.

In the same way, one does not perceive that sexual union is grotesque
when engaged in making love (a beautiful and homely phrase, the
*making* of love). I think that the communion of husband and wife could
be thought of as a visible sign of the Sacrament of Matrimony, and in
the Nuptial Blessing the priest prays, "O God, Thou hast sanctified
marriage by a mystery so excellent that in the marriage union Thou didst
foreshadow the union of Christ and the Church."

The marriage union has always seemed to me to be an earthly shadow of
the Blessed Trinity. As the love of the Father and Son is the Holy
Spirit, the union of man and woman produces a child; the family is a
little trinity of love.

Some choose evil because they have not seen the good, and I could write
a little Kinsey report myself of sin and damage and unhappiness in the
lives of people I know who never learned to bring grace into the realm
of sex. Those who suppress sex wrongfully, who hate the flesh, either
become neurotic prudes or fall into the opposite extreme of excess.
Those unwilling or unable to accept the attitudes of the conventional
and puritanical bourgeoisie are easily betrayed by that "poisonous
fascination" of which Dr. Von Hildebrand writes. They begin the descent
to the Dark Angel, through the mysticism of Evil, only half knowing what
they are doing. The novels of Aldous Huxley, who savagely strips away
the fascination, are the best antidote I know to this kind of poison,
and I shall always be grateful that I read them in early youth. But he,
in his turn, is a Manichee with no compassion for this dear flesh.

For a more Christian view of life, the best books I have run across are
*Life Together* by Wingfield Hope (which I frequently re-read for the
vision -- for its true idealism and refreshing common sense); *In
Defense of Purity* by Dietrich Von Hildebrand; *Love in the Western
World* by Denis de Rougemont; the Encyclical on Christian marriage by
Pope PiusÂ XI. And the Nuptial Mass in the Missal.

There are such treasures of wisdom and beauty within the Church --
buried treasure. Remember how Peter used to go around saying that on the
subject of sex the Catholic Church is foolproofÂ ? He was quoting some
doctor in the middle west -- Minneapolis or Chicago. There is so much
that is good and beautiful to mediate. Do you know *At the Wedding
March* by Hopkins? It was written, I think, for his brother's wedding.
Lettered and framed, it makes a good gift to give a bride and groom.

AT THE WEDDING MARCH

God with honour hang your head.  
 Groom, and grace you, bride, your bed  
 With lissome scions, sweet scions,  
 Out of hallowed bodies bred.

Each be other's comfort kind:  
 Deep, deeper than divined.  
 Divine charity, dear charity,  
 Fast you ever, fast bind.

Then let the march tread our ears:  
 I to Him turn with tears    
 Who to wedlock, His wonder wedlock,  
 Deals triumph and immortal years.

And of course, the chapter from the *Imitation* beginning, "Nothing is
sweeter than love, nothing stronger, etc."

I did like Cy Echele's blessing for the bed so much, and I read it at an
appropriate time, as we have just bought their first beds for Elizabeth
and Michael. They are to be delivered tomorrow, and we shall set them
up, sprinkle them with holy water, and read the prayer composed by
Cyril. So many thanks for sending it on and much love to you.

In Christ  
 Mary

April 18

"WOMEN'S JOB is to love," Sister Peter Claver used to say to me when I
was overflowing with indignation over the injustices and suffering I saw
around me. She was always reminding me that the greatest weapon we had
to overcome evil and hatred was to love all men for the Christ that was
in them.

The more I thought on this subject of the love of God and the love of
man, the more I thought of the nuptial love spoken of so often in the
Bible. There are other relationships used as an expression of the kind
of love which must govern our conduct. On this earth we must often be
thinking in terms of the love a child has for its parent. When the heart
is dull and work oppresses, we think in terms of the duty of servant to
master, the created to the Creator.

Strangely enough, even though this love is so often spoken of not only
in the Bible but by the saints in their writings, there have been many
objections because of it, made to the retreat we have at our Newburgh
farm (when we can get the retreat masters who give this retreat), a
retreat which has also been given in Pittsburgh by Father Hugo and by
Father Lacouture in Canada.

A great controversy has arisen about this retreat which is not settled
yet, mainly because of the implications of the teaching that we are sons
of God and must so behave. The controversy is over nature and the
supernatural and man's death and resurrection to a new life, putting off
the old and putting on the new man.

The teaching has been that love which is of the Lover for the Beloved
can only be between equals, and so to achieve this we must die to the
natural and live supernatural lives, doing everything for the love of
God.

Not being a theologian or a philosopher, I have written little on the
subject and wish to talk and write less.

But while we are on the subject of the Catholic teaching in regard to
love and sex, I should like to quote from a book by Father JohnÂ J. Hugo
called *A Sign of Contradiction*.

He is dealing with one objection made by a Censor in the Society of
Jesus to this aspect of Father Lacouture's teaching.

The quotation is extensive, but because it deals so beautifully with the
love of God and man, I wish to quote it in full, and I am sure that
Father Hugo will not mind, and that our readers will be glad to have
this clear expression of the teachings of the saints.

Excerpt from *A Sign of Contradiction*

>The comparison between sexual union and the Beatific Vision, the Censor
says, is to be viewed "with horror." And why, pray, with horror? Is it
that there is something evil in sexual union? If there is anything evil
in it, then indeed we would have to view "with horror" any comparison
between it and God. But is it evil? To say so would be to fall into that
very Manicheanism (teaching that material nature is evil) of which
Father Lacouture himself has been falsely accused. Here, however, we see
how wide a circuit Father Lacouture cuts around Manicheanism: far from
regarding nature as essentially depraved, he is ready to find even in
sexual union itself -- most deeply wounded of all our faculties by the
Fall, if St. Thomas is correct -- the very image of the Creator and of
that most glorious attribute of the Creator, His love. In *Le
Seminaire* Father Lacouture was condemned for teaching the very
Manicheanism that he is here condemned for so clearly avoiding. Just
where may the poor man turn? "John came neither eating nor drinking, and
they say, 'He has a devil!' The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and
they say, 'Behold, a glutton and a wine-drinker!'Â " (Matt. 11:18-19).

>But if sex and sexual union are to be considered creatures of God, as
indeed they are, then there is no reason why they may not be compared,
by way of analogy, with Him Who made them. For the Creator leaves His
image, more or less perfectly, in all His creatures. And this tracing of
analogies holds an honored place in Catholic theology: outside of divine
revelation itself, it is the only *positive* means we have for studying
and contemplating God. By means of it theologians seek to fill in the
gaps left by revelation in our knowledge of God. And in this particular
case, the analogy between sexual union and the union of love between God
and the soul is at once affirmed by reason and pointed out by divine
revelation itself.

The trouble is that the Censor himself is not free from a certain
Manichean tendency! Like so many others, when he thinks of sexual union,
he's thinking only of the physical union of sex; and he speaks of this
as though it were in some sense evil. Now sexual union of course is at
once physical and psychic (or spiritual). When the physical union of sex
is divorced from the spiritual element of genuine love, as in
prostitution, then sexual union is just that: prostitution. But when the
union of sex is spiritual as well as physical, as God intended it to be,
then it is a noble thing, the consummation and fulfillment of the
highest human love, that between man and wife, which is blessed by the
Church in the Sacrament of Matrimony. All love is perfected in union; in
its fullest sense, it *is*  union; so that sexual union, being the climax
and consummation of the highest human love, is the very noblest of God's
creatures; there is nothing in all creation which provides a more apt or
truer analogy for the contemplation of God. Is it to be wondered at that
almost all of Father Lacouture's comparisons are taken from sexual
union? I think not; you will find the same thing, if you care to look,
in all the mystical writers of the Church. Let us glance at some
examples.

God Himself indicated this analogy; its source is the Holy Scripture.
Should we, for example, view "with horror" such passages as the
following from the Canticle of Canticles, which not only point out the
comparison but describe it with some intimacy of detail?

Show me, O thou whom my soul lovest, where thou feedest, where thou
liest in the midday.Â .Â .Â . Thy cheeks are beautiful as the turtledove's,
thy neck as jewels.Â .Â .Â . Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, and comely.
Our bed is flourishing.Â .Â .Â . His left hand is under my head, and his
right hand shall embrace me. In my bed by night I sought him whom my
soul loveth. (Canticle I, 6, 9, 15; II, 6; III, 1)

This Canticle, ever a treasure to Catholic mystics, is so perfectly a
love poem that rationalistic Bible critics maintain plausibly that it is
*only* a love poem and not the inspired word of God at all.

Does the Censor subscribe to this interpretation? Or will he accept the
orthodox view that the Sacred Writer is here writing of divine love by
allegory and analogy?

Jesus, when He appeared, described Himself as "the Bridegroom." A
bridegroom is a man having a bride: who is the bride of Jesus?
Obviously, He was speaking in a spiritual or mystical sense: He was
fulfilling the prophecy of the Canticle. So, Catholic nuns speak of
themselves as brides of Christ. But not nuns alone -- every Christian
soul is the bride of Jesus. Hence every Christian soul can find in the
sexual union of bride and groom the best analogy and most perfect
illustration of the relationship existing between himself and God.

Saint Paul (we hope the Censor is not too oppressed with "horror") does
not fail in turn to point out this analogy: "Husbands, love your wives,
just as Christ also loved the Church" (Eph. 5:25). Again, he says, "For
I have betrothed you to one spouse, that I might present you a chaste
virgin to Christ" (IIÂ Cor. 11:2).

Without knowledge of this imagery, the Catholic mystics could not be
understood at all. One unacquainted with it might be shocked, for
example, at the poems of St. John of the Cross:

O night that guided me,  
 O night more lovely than the dawn,  
 O night that joined Beloved with Lover,  
 Lover transformed in the Beloved.

Upon my flowery breast,  
 Kept wholly for himself alone,  
 There he stayed sleeping, and I caressed him,  
 And the fanning of the cedars made a breeze.

I remained lost in oblivion;  
 My face I reclined on the Beloved.  
 All ceased and I abandoned myself,  
 Leaving my cares forgotten among the lilies.

Such imagery is very bold -- what the Freudians could make of it! Should
it, however, be viewed "with horror"? Presumably one who undertakes the
office of censor is acquainted with such works as these. How then can he
condemn a brother religious and priest for using language and
illustrations that are wholly in accord with the age-old teaching
tradition of the Church? True, St. John of the Cross, whom we have
quoted, is a mystic. Nevertheless, the relationship he speaks of is that
of every Christian to God. Accordingly, not to mystics alone but to
every Christian, and that in the very ceremony of baptism, the Church
addresses these words:

Observe the commandments of God, that when Our Lord shall come to His
nuptials, thou mayest meet Him together with all the saints in the
heavenly court, and live forever and ever.

The only thing peculiar to the mystics is their vivid realization of the
nature of the soul's relationship with God, and their actual possession,
following great fidelity to grace, of a very perfect degree of union
with Him. It is one of the excellences of Father Lacouture's teaching
that he brings forcibly to the minds of ordinary Christians the
essential nature of the soul's union with God, as illustrated by the
analogy of Bridegroom and Bride. Otherwise, for the most part, we will
have to go to the mystics to hear these divine nuptials celebrated and
described -- so reluctant are most Christians, including numbers of
their teachers, even to hear of the King's invitation to the wedding
feast of His Son. St. Bernard (to go on with our citations) describes
this union:

For although the *Spouse,* as a pure creature, is less than her Creator,
and hence also loves less, yet if she loves with her whole being, her
love is perfect and wanting in nothing. It is love of this kind that
constitutes the *spiritual marriage* of the soul with the Word.

Mark that the Saint speaks of the spiritual marriage *of the soulÂ --* not
of the mystic -- with the Word. He goes on:

>Happy the spouse to whom it has been given to experience *an embrace* of
such surpassing delight! This spiritual embrace is nothing else but a
chaste and holy love, a love most sweet and ravishing, a love perfectly
serene and perfectly pure, a love that is mutual, intimate, and strong,
a love that joins two not in one flesh but in one spirit, according to
the Apostle's testimony: "He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit."

Nor is the description of this love in terms of an embrace a mere
accident:

This is in truth the alliance of a holy and spiritual marriage. But it
is saying too little to call it an alliance: it is rather an embrace.

Not forgetting that the Bridegroom in this case is divine as well as
human, and must therefore be treated with reverence as well as with
love, St. Bernard nevertheless says:

The Word is indeed one Who deserves to be honored, Who deserves to be
admired and wondered at; but He is better pleased to be loved. For He is
the Bridegroom, and *the soul* is His Bride. And between a bridegroom and
his bride, what relation would you look for other than the bond of
mutual love?

The Church, moreover, gives her approval to this language. Here, for
example, are the words she addresses to the newly wedded bride in the
Nuptial Blessing, clearly indicating the symbolical and spiritual
character of the marriage union:

O God, Who has made marriage sacred by a significance so sublime that in
the nuptial union Thou wast pleased to forecast the mystical union of
Christ and the Church.Â .Â .Â . Deus qui tam excellenti mysterio conjugalem
copulam consecrasti, ut Christi et Ecclesiae sacramentum praesignares in
foedere nuptiarum.Â .Â .Â .

Priests, especially, will observe that the word used in this blessing to
designate nuptial union, *copula,* is employed in theology to describe
not only sexual union in general but coitus in particular. Such a choice
of words, fully justifying St. Bernard's reference to the marriage
embrace, cannot be regarded as an accident; had the Church experienced
the Censor's horror, she would have carefully avoided this term.

Other spiritual masters use the same language. St. Francis de Sales, for
example, describing the attractiveness of the Bridegroom to the Bride,
writes,

The sacred spouse wished for the holy kiss of union: Oh, said she, *let
Him kiss me with the kiss of His mouth* (Cant. I, 1). But is there
affinity enough, O well-beloved spouse of the well-beloved, between thee
and thy loving one to bring to the union which thou desirest? Yes, says
she: give me it; this kiss of union, O Thou dear love of my heart: for
thy breasts are better than wine, smelling sweet of the best ointment.

The same saint makes quite explicitly the very comparison to which the
Censor most strongly objects -- that between sexual union and the
Beatific Vision:

In fine, the heavenly King, having brought the soul He loves to the end
of this life, assists her also in her blessed departure, by which he
draws her to the marriage bed of eternal glory.

Again, this is no exaggeration: the Church sanctions the thought by her
own usage. It is with a similar thought that she speeds her children
into eternity. Over the grave of the Christian departing from this world
she prays:

Teach us to watch and pray, that when Thy summons comes, we may go forth
to meet the Bridegroom and enter with Him into life everlasting.

These various prayers of the Church that we have been quoting have a
real doctrinal value; according to the axiom *lex orandi est lex
credendi* (the norm of prayer is the norm of beliefÂ ), they give us the
official teaching of the Church.

Since Newman describes a gentleman as one who does not willingly give
pain, it can be only the great importance of the subject that justifies
so complete a departure from the gentlemanly ideal as is involved in
setting down the above passages from the saints and prayers of the
Church, which undoubtedly have caused convulsions of horror in the
Censor and any others who share his views. For the matter is important;
it is not simply a question of propriety in the choice of literary
metaphors. We touch here, in truth, the very heart of Christianity, the
essential relationship that it establishes between God and the soul, a
relationship that marks it off from merely natural religion and a merely
rational code of upright conduct. That relationship is one of love: the
end of Christianity, the final goal to which everything else in the
Church is ordered, is to unite the souls of the faithful to God in the
love of eternal friendship. Therefore, the essential supernatural
relationship between God and man is one of personal, intimate, eternal
love. Natural religion, on the other hand, observes its correct norm of
conduct coldly and exactly according to reason. Without doubt, there is
also a natural love of God, enjoined upon man as a rational creature,
but it differs *toto coelo* from supernatural love, sharing in the
coldness, the abstractness, and the remoteness of the reason which is
its principle. Christianity transforms this relation, makes it genuine
affection, intimate, personal, tender -- in a word, changes it into a
true friendship, a most sublime love. Thus (not to speak here of
membership in the Church and participation in the sacraments, which is
presupposed in a Christian), the *practical* difference between Christian
and pagan, that is, the difference in actual conduct, is that the
Christian is motivated and inspired by love. After all, a Christian is
human, and must, like a pagan, observe the ordinary conditions of human
life; however much he may fast, he will also eat, drink, sleep, work,
take his recreation. The kingdom of God is within. The Christian King
Alfred, in a song that Chesterton put on his lips, thus describes the
difference between pagan and Christian to his heathen conquerors:

Our monks go robed in rain and snow,  
 But the heart of flame therein,  
 But you go clothed in feasts and flames  
 When all is ice within.

Now in order to bring home to our minds this essential relationship of
love between God and the soul, the Scripture employs two analogies: it
represents God as Father and Christians as His children; it also
represents God as Bridegroom and the soul as Bride. These are the two
ways, given to us by God Himself, for studying His love, for learning
its exigencies, for discovering the manner in which it is to be
expressed. Each of these analogies is useful, yet each by itself is
insufficient; hence God has provided the two together. The relationship
of child to parent reminds us that our love of God is one of dependence
as well as of tenderness, and must therefore be accompanied by filial
fear and reverence. The analogy of Bridegroom with Bride teaches us, as
no other method could, that the love of God is one almost of equality
(we having been elevated to the supernatural plane by grace), of deep
and intimate and lasting affection, as between spouses.

Of these analogies, the most perfect is that between Bride and Groom:
better even than the other it shows us the real nature of love: union
between those who are beloved of each other. It also shows us the
perfection of the union that should exist between God and the soul,
since the union between husband and wife is the most perfect known to
human love and friendship. Accordingly, St. Bernard, in distinguishing
his four degrees of love, illustrates the third by filial love, but the
fourth and highest degree he compares to nuptial love:

O truly a great thing is love. But it has degrees of greatness. In the
very highest of these degrees stands the love of the Bride. The children
also love, but they have an eye to the inheritance, the thought of
losing which makes them suspicious of everything and causes them to
regard with more fear than affection Him from whom they hope to receive
it.

Showing again the superiority of this highest degree, which can be
adequately described only in terms of nuptial love, he says,

For the soul that is such desires nothing for herself with a private
affection, neither happiness nor glory nor anything else whatever, but
loses herself completely in God, and has but one most eager desire,
namely, that the King should bring her into His bedchamber, that she
might belong to Him alone and enjoy his sweet caresses.

Clearly, to forget this essential relationship is to remove the heart
from Christianity and reduce it, in practice, to the observance of the
precepts of natural religion. It is to eliminate from Christianity
Christ Himself, His teaching, His way of life, the End that He has fixed
for our strivings. The special command that He laid upon us is that we
should love God with our whole heart, that is, exclusively, as a
faithful bride loves the bridegroom; and the highest gift and power that
He gave us -- charity -- is that which binds us to God by Love.
Accordingly, to throw discredit on the analogy, by which, better than
all other means, it is possible to teach the meaning of supernatural
love, is, in actual fact and effect, to eliminate that essential
relationship of love from the practice of our religion, reducing it to a
formal observance of rationally imposed duties, a reduction that the
other analogy, with its accent on fear, is powerless to prevent.

As we have progressed in discussing this point, the reader must have
been experiencing a mounting excitement; for we have come upon one of
the most closely guarded secrets in the Grand Strategy of the High
Command in Hell. It is really a magnificent plan, devised with such
genius as might be expected from angelic intelligences resolved to
divert Christians generally and Christian teachers in particular from
attaining, or even pursuing, the essential purpose of Christianity. The
devils, close students of human psychology that they are, accomplish
this end by taking advantage of the false delicacy, on the one hand, and
the prurience, on the other, with which sexual union nowadays is usually
regarded: both attitudes, although quite different in themselves, are
equally useful in causing sexual union to be regarded as something
shameful and therefore unworthy, as the Censor has expressed it, of
comparison with the Beatific Vision. And in this manner the analogy
revealed to us by the Holy Spirit Himself for disclosing the secrets of
divine love is thrown away in fear, contempt, and even "horror," as
though it were monstrous to suggest the thought.

Let those who share the Censor's views look to their employ.

And if the Censor, or others like him, whether moved by sham-delicacy or
prurience, regard this comparison "with horror" or similar sentiments,
let them know that others, free from such distortions of spiritual
insight, think very differently on this subject. There was, for example,
the Catholic layman, married, who, hearing this comparison brought out
clearly on one of our retreats, exclaimed to the priest directing it,
"For the first time in my life I understand the true beauty and
sublimity of Christian marriage, the reason why our Lord made it a
sacrament, the spiritual significance of the wedding union, and its
place in the overall plan of Providence."


