% *On Pilgrimage* 
% Dorothy Day

June
---

*Summary: Describes the hustle and bustle around the farm--planting,
building, cooking. Ruminates about conversion, calling each person to a
revolution beginning with themselves--to make a start toward a new way
of living based on distributism. Says distributism is neither communism
nor capitalism but based on individual ownership of land, tools,
workshops, and factories. Keyword: economics (DDLW \#481).*

June 10  
Maryfarm, Newburgh

EVERY DAY the planting goes on. Tomato plants, cabbage, celery,
asparagus, rhubarb, peppers, carrots, beets, beans -- so much that I
cannot think of it all. Today, a hot June day, it has been onions. Jane
has begged onions from the wholesalers, and John Filliger and Tom and
George and Jim have been out since lunch putting them in. They were soft
ones which they were unable to sell. We have not been able to buy onion
sets; the time for them is past, the onion growers around Florida, New
York, tell us.

The cow is giving twenty-four quarts of milk a day, and we can use every
bit of it, with eighteen sitting down to table, quite aside from
retreats. People come to retreats and stay awhile. People pass by on the
road and come in to stay weeks. Several leave and several arrive.

Last week it was Father Francis Meenan's retreat that brought the
crowds, a retreat for men, and they all said it was the best yet. I went
to New York to take care of the office so that all at Mott Street could
come to the farm over the Memorial Day weekend. No one on our block
seemed to be going away for the holiday. It was as noisy, as crowded as
ever. On Sunday morning there was one of those tragedies which attracted
a still greater crowd. A woman down the street who had lost her husband
a few months ago was washing her windows on a Sunday morning, fell three
stories to the ground, and was killed instantly. I passed her on my way
home from Mass. With the crowd and the ambulance out in front, I thought
it was someone being brought to the hospital, a routine we had become
used to. It was a terrible shock as I passed down the middle of the
street to see the figure of a woman lying in the gutter, amongst all
kinds of litter, half-covered with a piece of brown paper from a
neighboring butcher shop. It always seems [to take] an interminable
length of time for police, ambulance, doctor to arrive. The priest
arrived first.

It was quiet enough around the office. A few visitors came in, bringing
boxes of clothes. Marge was housebound, what with the children having
measles, German measles, and chicken pox right after each other. Women
were sick in the house, and some who were not sick were disorderly.

During the last two months, Johanna and Tommy have been praying for a
[new] station wagon to take children and their mothers to the farm. They
had gone up in [one] to Newburgh last year, but this year the old wagon
has fallen apart. So they had started to pray. Lo and behold, a friend
of the farm turned over his 1932 Chevrolet to me, and after seventy-five
dollars' worth of work on it, I was able to drive Bridget, Anne, and
Dave back to New York in it with no mishaps. We came over the new Storm
King highway, picked sweet clover on the way, [and] enjoyed the view of
the river if we did not enjoy the sound we made between the echoing
mountains. We sounded either like a Mack truck or an aeroplane, but I
trust after we get the muffler fixed (there are a few large holes mended
with tin cans), we will have a little more holy silence. I was afraid
the children would feel that St. Joseph had let them down. I myself was
much pleased with the car. But the children were delighted and insisted
on calling it their station wagon. I had no sooner arrived boastingly in
my new conveyance when Tom Sullivan informed me that another friend had
given a 1924 Columbia which was in much better shape all around --
upholstery, engine, tires, general appearance, etc. To think of it -- a
car for the farm and a car to pick up stuff around New York! Both small
cars that do not use too much gas. The men in the office talk of
exchanging the two for a truck, but I am dead against it. These will get
us there.

When I returned to the farm last Tuesday, I brought Johanna with me to
recover from her measles, German measles, and chicken pox. Since she
arrived she has fallen on her nose, barked her shins, had a skirmish
with the dog, made friends with the bull, and helped milk the cow. Now
we learn from New York that Tommy has mumps, so she just won't go home
until this awful siege is past. The only thing left is whooping cough.

As I write, suppertime approaches. Helen has gone down the road to
collect some promised rhubarb, Florence is mending here on the porch
where I write, Peter is reading, and Charlie is tearing around inside,
concocting one of his wonderful desserts. He has been serving us tender
milkweed tops which taste like asparagus, and we have also had
lamb's-quarter, dock weed, and dandelion greens aplenty.

Hans Tunnesen is busy working on a new floor in the unused barn, which
will be a dormitory for mothers and children. (The barnyard will be made
into the bull pen for the youngsters that Tim O'Brien wrote about some
years ago.) We got the lumber for two hundred and seventy-five dollars,
and we haven't a cent to pay for it. Brescia, the lumber man in
Montgomery, is trusting us, and we told him we would have to pay in
dribs and drabs, just as we could beg it. So those of you who are
interested in family retreats are invited to chip in. There are six
retreats scheduled for the summer months, and there will be weekends in
the fall. We have already had three retreats this spring. Of course it
will be during the summer months that the families will wish to come, so
we could not wait for the lumber. St. Joseph was so prompt in sending
the cars, we are sure he will take care of the barn floor and staircase
and chimney for us.

June 20

SOME TIME ago, Douglas Hyde, one of the editors of the *London Daily
Worker,* became a Catholic. In an article in the *Catholic Herald* of
England, he wrote,

In 1943, I libeled, in the course of my work on *The Daily Worker,* a
Catholic paper, *The Weekly Review,* and a number of its contributors. In
preparation for an anticipated court case, which in fact was never
heard, I read through the paper's files for the preceding year and
studied each issue as it appeared.

I had accused it of providing a platform for Fascists at a moment when
Fascist bombs were raining down on Britain. I came in time to realize
that not only had I libeled it in law but also in fact.

For years my cultural interests had been in the Middle Ages. My favorite
music was also pre-Purcell; in architecture my interest was in Norman
and Gothic; in literature my favorites were Chaucer and Langland. We had
a family joke which we made each year when holidays were discussed:
"Let's go on a trip to the thirteenth century."

And these were the interests of the people behind the *Weekly Review.* I
came to look forward to the days when it appeared on my desk. A natural
development was that I became increasingly interested in the writings of
Chesterton and Belloc. . . .

A good Communist must never permit himself to think outside his
Communism. I had done so, and the consequences were bound to be fatal to
my Communism.

That, as it were, is the mechanics of my introduction to Catholicism.

Not long ago at a mass meeting of the workers in a Finnish factory, when
the question was asked which they would prefer, Communism or capitalism,
they shouted, "Neither."

It is never too late to begin. It is never too late to turn over a new
leaf. In spite of the atom bomb, the jet plane, the conflict with
Russia, ten just men may still save the city.

Maybe if we keep on writing and talking, there will be other conversions
like Mr. Hyde's. It was reading an article that got Father Damien his
helper Brother Joseph, at Molokai. It was reading that converted St.
Augustine. So we will keep on writing.

And talking, too. They always said in England that the Distributists did
nothing but talk. But one needs to talk to convey ideas. St. Paul talked
so much and so long that in the crowded room one young lad, sitting on
the windowsill, fell out of the window and was killed like a woman down
the street from us, last week. Only she was not listening to the word of
God but washing windows on a Sunday morning. And it was sad that there
was no St. Paul to bring her to life. Her life finished there. But we
are still alive, though we live in a city of ten million, and one can
scarcely call it life, and the papers every day carry news of new
weapons of death.

However, we are still here. We are still marrying and having children,
and having to feed them and house them and clothe them. We don't want
them to grow up and say, "This city is such hell that perhaps war will
be preferable. This working in a laundry, a brass factory, the kitchen
of a restaurant, is hell on earth. At least war will teach me new
trades, which the public school system has failed to do. This coming
home at night to a four-room or a two-room tenement flat and a wife and
three children with whooping cough (there are usually not more than
three children in the city) is also hell." And what can be done about
it? We are taught to suffer, to embrace the cross. On the other hand,
St. Catherine said, "All the way to heaven is heaven, because He said,
'I am the Way.' " And He was a carpenter and wandered the roadsides of
Palestine and lived in the fields and plucked the grain to eat on a
Sunday as He wandered with His disciples.

This morning as I went to Mass my eyes stung from the fumes of the cars
on Canal Street. I crossed a vacant lot, a parking lot filled with
cinders and broken glass, and longed for an ailanthus tree to break the
prison-gray walls and ground all around. Last night all of us from Mott
Street were at a meeting at Friendship House to hear Leslie Green,
Distributist, and the talk was good and stimulating so that in spite of
the noise, the fumes, [and] the apathy which the city brings, I was
impelled this morning to write. My son-in-law, David, has also been
deluging me with pamphlets. He has one of the best libraries in the
country on the subject, and deals with the books and pamphlets which
discuss Distributism.

We could list perhaps fifty among our friends, and if we went through
the files of our readers we could find many more who have gone to the
land. These toeholds on the land have meant, however, that the young,
married couples had a little stake to start with. They had, or could
borrow, a bit of money to make a down payment on a farm. Their families
could give them a start if it was only a few hundred dollars. (There was
an ad in the *New York Times* yesterday of a farm for sale for twelve
hundred dollars, three hundred down and twenty-five dollars a month.)
Even with the bit of money, however, faith, vision, [and] some knowledge
of farming or a craft are needed. People need to prepare themselves.
Parents need to prepare their children.

On the one hand, there are already some toeholds on the land; there are
those farmers already there who have the right philosophy; there is
still time, since we have not as yet a socialist government or
nationalization of the land. We have some government control, but not
much yet. Not compared to what there may be soon.

On the other hand, there are such stories as that in the last issue of
*Commonweal* about the de Giorgio strike in the long central valley of
California, of fifty-eight thousand acres owned by one family, of two
thousand employees, of horrible living conditions, poor wages, forced
idleness, "times of repose" between crops, when machines are cared for
but not men, women, and children. *The Grapes of Wrath* pattern is here,
is becoming an accepted pattern. Assembly-line production in the factory
and mass production on the land are part of a social order accepted by
the great mass of our Catholics, priests and people [alike]. Even when
they admit it is bad, they say, "What can we do?" And the result is
palliatives, taking care of the wrecks of the social order, rather than
changing it so that there would not be quite so many broken homes,
orphaned children, delinquents, industrial accidents, so much
destitution in general.

Palliatives, when what we need is a revolution, beginning now. Each one
of us can help start it. It is no use talking about how bored we are
with the word. Let us not be escapists but admit that it is upon us. We
are going to have it imposed upon us, or we are going to make our own.

If we don't do something about it, the world may well say, "Why bring
children into the world, the world being what it is?" We bring them into
it and start giving them a vision of an integrated life so that they too
can start fighting.

This fighting for a cause is part of the zest of life. Father Damasus
said once at one of our retreats that people seemed to have lost that
zest for life, that appreciation of the value of life, the gift of life.
It is a fundamental thing. Helene Isvolsky, in a lecture on Dostoyevsky
at the Catholic Worker House last month, said that he was marked by that
love for life. He had almost been shot once. He had been lined up with
other prisoners and all but lost his life. From then on he had such a
love for life that it glowed forth in all his writings. It is what marks
the writings of Thomas Wolfe, whose writing was a Niagara.

But how can one have a zest for life under such conditions as those we
live in at 115 Mott Street? How can that laundry worker down the street,
working in his steamy hell of a basement all day, wake each morning to a
zest for life?

In the city, very often one lives in one's writing. Writing is not an
overflow of life, a result of living intensely. To live in Newburgh, on
the farm, to be arranging retreats, to be making bread and butter,
taking care of and feeding children there, washing and carding wool,
gathering herbs and salads and flowers -- all these things are so good
and beautiful that one does not want to take time to write except that
one has to share them, and not just the knowledge of them, but how to
start to achieve them.

The whole retreat movement is to teach people to "meditate in their
hearts," to start to think of these things, to make a beginning, to go
out and start to love God in all the little things of every day, to so
make one's life and one's children's life a sample of heaven, a
beginning of heaven.

The retreats are to build up a desire, a knowledge of what to desire.
"Make me desire to walk in the way of Thy commandments." Daniel was a
man of "desires." Our Lord is called "the desire of the everlasting
hills."

Yes, we must write of these things, of the love of God and the love of
His creatures, man and beast, and plant and stone.

"You make it sound too nice," my daughter once said to me, when I was
writing of life on the land, and voluntary and involuntary poverty,
which means in specific instances . . . doing without water, heat,
washing machines, cars, electricity, and many other things, even for a
time the company of our fellows, in order to make a start.

And others have made the same accusation who are making a start on the
land. And I know well what they mean. One must keep on trying to do it
oneself, and one must keep on trying to help others to get these ideas
respected.

At Grailville, Ohio, there is not only the big school of the Grail
Apostolate, where there is electricity, modern plumbing, [and] a certain
amount of machinery that makes the work go easier and gives time for
studies; but there is also a sample farm, twelve acres, with no
electricity, no modern plumbing, no hot water, where the washing is done
outside over tubs and an open fire, and yet there, too, the life is most
beautiful and a foretaste of heaven. There one can see how all things
show forth the glory of God, and how "All the way to heaven is heaven."

Artists and writers, as I have often said, go in for voluntary poverty
in order to "live their own lives and do the work they want to do." I
know many a Hollywood writer who thought he was going out there to earn
enough to leave to buy a little farm and settle down and do some really
good writing. But the fleshpots of Egypt held him. And I knew many a
Communist who had his little place in the country, private ownership
too, and not just a rented place, a vacation place.

Property is proper to man. Man is born to work by the sweat of his brow,
and he needs the tools, the land to work with.

The principles of Distributism have been more or less implicit in much
that we have written in *The Catholic Worker* for a long time. We have
advised our readers to begin with four books, Chesterton's *What's Wrong
with the World?* and *The Outline of Sanity,* and Belloc's *The Servile
State* and *The Restoration of Property*.

These are the books which Douglas Hyde must have read, which gave him
the third point of view, neither industrial capitalist nor Communist.

In a brief pamphlet by S. Sagar, made up of a collection of articles
which ran in *The Weekly Review,* Distributism is described as follows:

To live, man needs land (on which to have shelter, to cultivate food, to
have a shop for his tools) and capital, which may be those tools, or
seeds, or materials.

Further, he must have some arrangement about the control of these two
things. Some arrangement there must obviously be, and to make such an
arrangement is one of the reasons why man forms communities. Men being
what they are, every society must make laws to govern the control of
land and capital.

The principle from which the law can start is that *all* its subjects
should exercise control of land and capital by means of direct family
ownership of these things. This, of course, is the principle from which,
until yesterday, our own law started. It was the theory of capitalism
under which *all* were free to own, none compelled by law to labor.
[Popular magazines like *Time* and the *Saturday Evening Post* are filled
with illustrations of these principles, which all men admit are good,
but unfortunately the stories told are not true. It is the reason why
great trusts like . . . Standard Oil and General Motors have public
relations men, why there is a propaganda machine for big business, to
convert the public to the belief that capitalism really is based on good
principles, Distributist principles, really is working out for the
benefit of all, so that men have homes and farms and tools and pride in
the job.] Unfortunately, in practice, under capitalism the many had not
opportunity of obtaining land and capital in any useful amount and were
compelled by physical necessity to labor for the fortunate few who
possessed these things. But the theory was all right. Distributists want
to save the theory by bringing the practice in conformity with it. . . .

Distributists want to distribute control as widely as possible by means
of a direct family ownership of land and capital. This, of course, means
cooperation among these personal owners and involves modifications,
complexities, and compromises which will be taken up later.

The aim of Distributism is family ownership of land, workshops, stores,
transport, trades, professions, and so on.

Family ownership in the means of production so widely distributed as to
be the mark of the economic life of the community -- this is the
Distributist's desire. It is also the world's desire. . . . The vast
majority of men who argue against Distributism do so not on the grounds
that it is undesirable but on the grounds that it is impossible. We say
that it must be attempted, and we must continue to emphasize the results
of not attempting it.

The Catholic Worker farm at Newburgh has ninety-six acres. We are
raising hay, corn, vegetables, pigs, chickens, a cow. Every few days the
dog, King, has brought in woodchucks, and some of them weigh eight
pounds. He must have caught fifty this year. Down at the docks on the
Hudson River the Negroes fish without a license for fish and eels. It is
woodchuck season, and you can eat the woodchucks now. You skin them as
you do rabbits, and roasted with sage dressing they make a good meal,
and they are cleaner than chicken or hog. Right now Carmela and Florence
are sitting out under the crab apple tree, stringing beans. There are
peas and broccoli and Swiss chard besides lettuce for salads. It is
getting easier to feed the forty or so retreatants who come every few
weeks to the farm, and the twenty who are here all summer.

I tell these things to make the mouth water. In the fall we are going to
put in a field of wheat, and next summer, God willing, we will have our
own flour for the good whole-wheat loaves that come out of the oven
every day.

For the average worker it is more and more difficult to get food.
Butter, oleo, and fat are sky high. Meat costs a fortune. Food prices
have gone up 133 percent and milk 85 percent. We saw these figures in a
magazine recently to advertise milk as a food. How to live, how to feed
a family! Most of all, how to find shelter!

We are not expecting utopia here on this earth. But God meant things to
be much easier than we have made them. A man has a natural right to
food, clothing, and shelter. A certain amount of goods is necessary to
lead a good life. A family needs work as well as bread. Property is
proper to man. We must keep repeating these things. Eternal life begins
now. "All the way to heaven is heaven, because He said, 'I am the
Way.' " The cross is there, of course, but "in the cross is joy of
spirit." And love makes all things easy. If we are putting off the old
man and putting on Christ, then we are walking in love, and love is what
we all want. But it is hard to love, from the human standpoint and from
the divine standpoint, in a two-room apartment. We are eminently
practical, realistic.

Irene has charge of the clothes distribution at Mott Street (besides
having charge of the women's house and writing for the paper and seeing
visitors), and the other day a mother of eleven children, nine of them
living, came in to get clothes. They are all living at the municipal
lodging house on Third Street. The other afternoon when the rain had
stopped, Irene and I walked down Mott Street to Bleecker where Mott
Street ends, then over to the Bowery and up one block to Third Street,
and there, just to the east of the Bowery, is the big building that used
to be the Bowery Y.M.C.A. and which is now a municipal shelter.

I was familiar with the place because it used to have a "clean-up
system" before the days of D.D.T. (which you can use like a talcum
powder), and there once in a while I used to bring my old friend Mr.
Breen. He was a very dignified old man, with a beautiful beard, and he
walked with a cane. He looked like Chief Justice Hughes. He had worked
as Sunday editor of the *Washington Post,* and he had worked for the *New
York World,* written reviews for the *Commonweal,* poetry for us, and had
assisted us, during his last years, in answering our large
correspondence. His wife and children had died, he had fallen into bad
times, and during the Depression we became his family. For a time he had
slept in the world's largest bedroom, on a dock down at South Ferry,
where the municipality put up about twelve hundred men every night. He
used to tell us a story of one old man who evidently thought he was in a
cathedral, so vast was the long, dim dock at night, and in his
nightshirt, with his long sticks of legs making him look like a strange
bird, he used to "make the stations" down the inner aisle between the
double-decker beds, pausing at every seventh bed to pray.

Mr. Breen had many such stories of the poor. We had to take him, as I
said before, to the Bowery Y for a clean-up every now and then. One
could bathe at leisure, have one's clothes cleaned and pressed, and have
a shave and a haircut -- all for seventy-five cents. We used to go in
state in a taxi cab. It was very hard to get Mr. Breen to go, and he
would only go with me. As we went up to the desk and the very courteous
young man behind it, Mr. Breen would look at him haughtily and say in
lordly fashion, "I have come to be deloused." Then he would turn to me
with a sweeping bow, thank me for my escort, and I would leave him there
for the night.

Now this building is part of the municipal lodging house. On either side
of the entrance hall there are beautiful rural scenes painted on the
walls, a road through the woods, a country field, and around the tiled
halls, children from one year old and up are playing, slipping in and
out between the hordes of young and old, black and white, drunk and
sober men who are also served, who also are "clients" getting their
lodging for the night and several meals a day. The men were registering
at the desk as we came in. They all could write their names on the
ledger; they were all literate. After they registered, they were all
taken upstairs to the dormitories to bed. It was five-thirty. No one was
taken in after nine.

Downstairs, meals were still being served. They had soup or stew, as we
could see from the windows outside, two slices of bread, and huge mugs
of cocoa.

I don't know how many thousands of men are served every day, are lodged
every day. What was occupying our minds was the fact that forty-five
families were lodged there too, with six, eight, nine children. The
mothers sat around, the fathers came in to report the result of their
day's search for rooms. (And who wants families of four children even,
let alone nine?) The children restlessly ran from end to end of the
hall, and we tried to talk.

"Isn't there a playroom?" Yes, but the colored, the Puerto Rican, the
Italian, and the "American" children fought. It was nerve-racking. There
were separate bedrooms for different members of the family; it was not
overcrowded.  There is a doctor for the women and children. The city was
doing what it could. Up at 26th Street, another branch of the municipal
lodging house, there were other families and more men. What they were
trying to do was bring all the men down to Third Street and get the
women and children away from the Bowery and up to 26th Street, where
there was a playground, a dead-end street, the river, and more light and
air.

Yesterday two Irish Christian Brothers came to call and told us of
Harlem,  where their order had a school in what was the largest parish
in the world. There were thirty thousand people in it, it was estimated.
Families fleeing the hunger of Puerto Rico were living three families to
an apartment. It was the most congested, most neglected section of the
city. With all these thousands, the church on Sunday was only half full.
It is not a leakage from the Church; it is a landslide.

We have been working on these problems at the Catholic Worker for the
past fifteen years, and we can say with all sincerity that things have
never been so bad as they are now, even in the worst of [the]
Depression. Now men may have work, but they lack homes. There may be odd
jobs, poorly paid jobs, something coming in the way of work, but the
housing situation gets worse and worse. Everywhere it is the same. In
every city and town the story is the same. There are no apartments;
there are no houses.

Mr. O'Daniel, father of the eleven we were visiting, had had a job as
janitor. In order to make their profits and avoid the penalties of rent
gouging, the owners of the building he was in had transformed a
twelve-apartment house into a twenty-four apartment house of
two-and-a-half rooms each. The board of health got after the owner for
having a large family of children in the basement, and he had let them
go. No one wants to employ families; none want to rent to families.

And of course we can understand the homeowners' point of view. Once we
saw a cartoon in the *Saturday Evening Post* of a mother rebuking her
child. "Don't deface the wall, William. We *own* this house." In other
words, what you own is taken care of. Property means responsibility.
Property is proper to man.

But what a need there is to arouse the conscience! To call attention to
the poor! "Are there any more poor?" This fatuous question has been
asked me so often by well-meaning listeners at meetings that one must
answer it. "What about the bricklayer and his huge wages? Never have
wages been so high." And what do high wages mean when there is no just
price? Anyway, with all the talk of high wages, most of the people
around here that I know are working for thirty and thirty-five dollars a
week. Also, the great white-collar class of young men and young women
are getting along by living at home, profiting by the industry and
thrift and better housing opportunity of their parents.

People sooner or later will have to admit that things are rapidly
getting worse, not better. People said during the war that Hitler had
the theory that the bigger the lie, the easier it was to get people to
believe it. It seems to me we have quite a number of these big lies.

There is the lie of high wages.

There is the lie of widespread ownership.

There is the plentiful production lie.

There is the everyone-consuming-more lie.

S. Sagar says that the great danger of today is not a revolt of the
proletariat but the lethargy of the proletariat. He also says that the
"preliminary to any steps taken towards Distribution was the creation of
the *will* to take them."

Here is one quotation from Pope Pius XII which ought to be considered a
mandate along these lines:

We confirm what only recently we had occasion to expound. For Catholics,
the only path to be followed in solving the social problem is clearly
outlined in the doctrine of the Church. The blessing of God will descend
on your work if you do not swerve in the slightest degree from this
path. You have no need to think up specious solutions or to work with
facile and empty formulas for results that prove only a delusion. What
you can and ought to strive for is a more just distribution of wealth.
This is and this remains a central point in Catholic social doctrine.

Joseph T. Nolan writes in Orate Fratres,

Too long has idle talk made out Distributism as something medieval and
myopic, as if four modern Popes were somehow talking nonsense when they
said: The law should favor widespread ownership (Leo XII); wages should
enable a man to purchase land (Leo XIII and Pius XI); the family is most
perfect when rooted in its own holding (Pius XII); and the tiller of the
soil still represents the natural order of things willed by God
(Pius XII). . . .

But in general there is so little facing of the problem of the land, or
of machinery, which the Franciscan Belliot called one of the gravest and
most disquieting elements in the social problem. How many Catholics,
especially liturgists, share the anxiety of the present Pope at the
agglomeration of huge populations in the cities "and the diminution of
modern man by the domination of the machine"? Neither the nihilists nor
the optimists who still dream of abundant production can fill our
present need; a lot closer are the realists who are willing to rebuild
an organic Christian society from the ground up, from the soil, who
might escape the very real prospects of unemployment, hunger, and
despair.

There are numerous steps that can be taken, outlined in *The Restoration
of Property* by Hilaire Belloc. But how to create in men a *desire* to
take them, a hope that they will be able to take them?

Things have gotten so desperate, Mr. Sagar says, goods have gotten so
scarce, the effort to find housing has become so heartbreaking, that now
at last today, after these many years, Distributism is going to be
discussed.

The alternatives are not capitalism or socialism. We must take into
consideration the nature of man and his needs, not just cash [for]
commodities, food, and clothing, but a home, a bit of land, and the
tools with which to work, part ownership in workshops and stores and
factories.

Distributism does not mean that everyone must be a farmer. The
Distributist thinks in terms of the village economy, and as for the size
of the CITY (the city of God) which Cardinal Suhard talks of our
building, that is a matter of situation. It may be five hundred, it may
be five thousand, it may be fifty thousand population. The main thing to
do is to *distribute* a the cities before the atom bomb does it. We are not
suggesting that it be done by force but by education. If that seems too
slow a method, probably depression, war, hunger, and homelessness will
play their part. We only know it is not human to live in a city of ten
million. It is not only not human, it is not possible. "Cities are the
occasion of sin," Father Vincent McNabb said, and of course any
theologian will say that we should flee the occasions of sin. Pope
Pius XII pointed out that it was difficult for modern youth to live in
the cities without heroic virtue. (And it was never intended that the
good life should demand *heroic* virtue.)

Distributism does not mean that we throw out the machine. The machine,
Peter Maurin used to say, should be the extension of the hand of man. If
we could do away with the assembly line, the slavery of the machine, and
the useless and harmful and destructive machines, we would be doing
well.

In the psalms it says, "Lord, make me *desire* to walk in the way of Thy
commandments." Daniel was called a man of desires, and because he was a
man of desires, the Lord heard him.

Cardinal Suhard of Paris and Father de Lubac, S.J., both cry out against
the refusal of some traditionalists to be co-creators with God and use
the tools which science has put in man's hands. But Father de Lubac also
writes (in *The Dublin Review*), "Does not the discovery of new values
involve the depreciation of other, perhaps more fundamental ones? And
does it not breed, even while the discovery is still modest and
tentative, a kind of intoxication, so that the passionate interest it
arouses tends to make men oblivious of everything else, even of
essentials? And so ambiguous situations pile up, leading inevitably to
crises whose outcome no one can safely prophesy."

But the essentials are food, clothing, and shelter. The essential is
ownership, which brings with it responsibility, and what is more
essential than the earth from which we all spring, and from which comes
our food, our clothes, our furniture, our homes?

It is as a woman, a mother, speaking for the family and the home, that I
protest the work of "priest-sociologists," who in their desire to help
the worker are going along with him in his errors and are accepting the
easy way of capitalist industrialism, which leads to collectivism and
the totalitarian state.

The warning is there, in Isaiah 26:5–6:

He shall bring down them that dwell on high; the high city he shall lay
low. He shall bring it down even unto the ground; he shall pull it down
even to the dust. The foot shall tread it down; the feet of the poor,
the steps of the needy.

So "strengthen ye the feeble hands, and confirm the weak knees. Say to
the fainthearted, 'Take courage and fear not. Behold, your God will
bring the bread of recompense. God Himself will come and save you.' "

