% The Story of Three Deaths - Peter Maurin, Lawrence Heaney, Willie Lurye
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1949, 1, 2.

*Summary: A loving obituary for Peter Maurin giving the details of his
death and burial. Speaks of his last five years of illness, the day he
died, his wake and funeral. Emphasizes the ways "He was another St.
Francis of modern times." (DDLW \#495).*

I want to write all the details before we forget them,--not the kind of
obituary which *Time* magazine is printing this week, nor the kind that
appeared in the *Times* and the *Tribune*, and the *Brooklyn Tablet*, or
the *Catholic News*. The kind of story I want to write will be a letter
to all Peter's friends around the country who want to hear the details
of his death and burial.

"Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints," and the
details of such a death are precious.

Plato said: "Other people are not likely to be aware that those who
pursue philosophy aright study nothing but dying and being dead. But if
this be true, it would be absurd to be eager for nothing but this all
their lives, and then be troubled when that came for which they had all
along been eagerly practicing."

And St. Paul said, "We will not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning
them that are asleep, that you be not sorrowful, even as others who have
no hope."

So it will be understood that it is with a spirit of joy that we write
this month, because Peter is no longer suffering, no longer groaning
within himself and saying with St. Paul, "Who will deliver me from the
body of this death?"

No, we are sure that he welcomed Sister Death with joy, and that
underneath him he felt the Everlasting Arms.

I am writing this in New York, up in my room on the third floor, and all
winter before last, that hard winter, he waited up here for the weather
to clear so that he could go to the country. He had to lie in bed much
of the time, and the plaster is all picked off the wall by the side of
my bed where he slept while I was down in West Virginia with my
daughter. Marge and Joe took care of his needs and the children ran in
and out of his bedroom. He must have been very weary of lying in bed, he
who had travelled north and south, east and west in this vast country.
Up on the farm he had become worse these last two years. Everybody was
always so reassuring, exclaiming how well he looked, how bright he was,
but we who had known him these past seventeen years felt only the
tragedy of the death in life he was living. Truly he practiced for death
a very long time.

We have written this before, and we repeat it again. Peter was the poor
man of his day. He was another St. Francis of modern times. He was used
to poverty as a peasant is used to rough living, poor food, hard bed, or
no bed at all, dirt, fatigue, and hard and unrespected work. He was a
man with a mission, a vision, an apostolate, but he had put off from him
honors, prestige, recognition. He was truly humble of heart, and loving.
Never a word of detraction passed his lips and as St. James said, the
man who governs his tongue is a perfect man. He was impersonal in his
love in that he loved all, saw all others around him as God saw them. In
other words he saw Christ in them. And everyone loved him, I am sure,
though there were some strange criticisms.

He never spoke idle words, though he was a great teacher who talked for
hours on end, till late in the night and early morning. He roamed the
streets and the countryside and talked to all who would listen. But when
his great brain failed, he became silent. If he had been a babbler he
would have been a babbler to the end. But when he could no longer think,
as he himself expressed it, he remained silent.

For the last five years of his life he was this way, suffering, silent,
dragging himself around, watched by us all for fear he would get lost,
as he did once for three days; he was shouted at loudly by visitors as
though he were deaf, talked to with condescension as one talks to a
child to whom language must be simplified even to the point of
absurdity. That was one of the hardest things we had to bear, we who
loved him and worked with him for so long,--to see others treat him as
though he were simple minded.

The fact was he had been stripped of all,--he had stripped himself
throughout life. He had put off the old man, to put on the new. He had
done all that he could to denude himself of the world, and I mean the
world in the evil sense, not in the sense that "God looked at it and
found it good." He loved people, he saw in them what God meant them to
be. He saw the world as God meant it to be, and he loved it.

He had stripped himself, but there remained work for God to do. We are
to be pruned as the vine is pruned so that it can bear fruit, and this
we cannot do ourselves. God did it for him. He took from him his mind,
the one thing he had left, the one thing perhaps he took delight in. He
could no longer think. He could no longer discuss with others, give
others in a brilliant overflow of talk, his keen analysis of what was
going on in the world; he could no longer make what he called his
synthesis of *cult, culture and cultivation.*

It is a temptation to go on and on, but what I want to do is to give our
friends an account of his death.

He was sick for five years. It was as though he had a stroke in his
sleep. He dragged one leg after him, his face was slightly distorted,
and he found it hard to speak. And he repeated, ''I can no longer
think." When he tried to, his face would have a strained, suffering
expression. He had cardiac asthma, a hernia (as many hard workers have)
and he was in pain when he coughed.

For the first couple of years of invalidism, he lived at Easton with us,
and when we were about to move to Newburgh, New York, he went to stay
for the winter months with Mrs. Teresa Weider, who was the first
Catholic Worker of Rochester, New York, and who had always run a House
of Hospitality of her own. When we finished the moving, I brought him to
the farm at Newburgh. The house was too cold for him to live in in
winter as we burned only wood in our furnace, so he lived in a rear
house, a house of poured cement built originally as a chicken coop, and
which was divided into three rooms, one of which Fr. Faley has, another
Alan Dates, and the third was shared by Peter with Hans Tunneson. Hans
was with him to keep the room warm and clean, and to watch over Peter at
night, but also it was typical of Peter never to ask anything for
himself, of course not privacy, that greatest of all luxuries. He had
never had a bed of his own, really, until it came to his last illness.
He just took what was available in the House of Hospitality.

He had always been a meager eater, getting along on two meals a day,
never eating between meals. He used to say when he was offered anything,
"I don't need it." But towards the close of his life, he was inclined to
stuff down his food hastily like a child, and he had to be cautioned to
eat slowly. Perhaps there was a hangover from the hunger of a childhood
in a large family where there was never enough to eat. There were
twenty-three children in all, over the years.

Other habits clung to him. When I'd go in to see if he were warm enough,
I'd find him lying in bed with his pants folded neatly and under his
head, and his coat wrapped around his feet, a habit I suppose which he
got from living in flophouses where clothes are often stolen. And once I
found him sleeping in the dead of winter with only a spread over him, in
a dead cold room. Someone had taken his blankets.

One thing we can be happy about too, and that is that he felt he had
finished his work before his mind failed, as St. Albertus Magnus' great
mind failed. He used to say, "I have written all I have to say, I have
done all I can, let the younger men take over." So he suffered but not
with the feeling that there was much still that he could do.

We tried to make a record of Peter's voice on a wire recorder, and we
had him read aloud all his essays on Houses of Hospitality. His voice
strangely enough was louder and clearer as it came over the wire, than
it had been for a long time. We spent quite a few days over this, Dave
Mason and I, because Peter tired easily, and then, after we had
triumphantly made a fifteen-minute spool, someone else tried to work the
machine and erased it all.

We wanted to have Peter's book finished before he died, so that we could
place it in his hands, and though the galleys were all done and the page
proofs are being set up now, and Ed Willock of Integrity is making the
illustrations--that too, was denied Peter, and he never could hold this
finished work of his in his hands.

For the past two months I had been at the farm while Jane O'Donnell was
away at Grailville, and then while returning from the funeral of Larry
Heaney, I received a telephone call about his death. Just before I had
left, I had told him of Larry's sudden death, and he said yes, to my
question as to whether he remembered Larry. He had loved him much, had
sent him his quotations listed as cult, culture and cultivation over the
years, and rejoiced in his total acceptance of his teaching, and when I
said to him, "Now you will have someone waiting for you in heaven," his
face lit up in a radiant smile. He had not smiled for months; there had
only been a look of endurance, even of pain, on his face.

That was our goodbye. Over the telephone out in Avon, Ohio, at Our Lady
of the Wayside Farm, we heard the news.

It was midnight and I had already fallen asleep. Dorothy Gauchat and
Bill were not yet asleep. They had been saying the rosary for Ruth Ann
and Catherine Reser, they said, because Catherine had lost another baby
a few months ago, and Ruth Ann had lost her husband. When we hung up the
receiver, Bill suggested we say Vespers of the Office of the Dead for
Peter, so we knelt there in that farm living room and prayed those
beautiful psalms that are like balm to the sore heart. No matter how
much you expect a death, no matter how much you may regard it as a happy
release, there is a gigantic sense of loss. With our love of life, we
have not yet got to that point where we can say with the desert father,
St. Anthony, "The spaces of this life, set over against eternity, are
brief and poor."

Peter had been sitting up for supper that Sunday night, and had sat out
in the sun all afternoon. There had been visitors from Friendship House
that very day, and on Saturday Lydwinne von Kersbergen from Grailville
had been at the farm, and had told Peter with love and reverence, all he
had meant to the lay apostolate throughout the world. It was like a
benediction from Europe, she might indeed have been representing Europe
at that moment in saying farewell to him. His writings have been
published there, he has been recognized there as perhaps he never has
here in this, his own adopted country.

John Filliger had shaved him Saturday, he remembered, and Michael
Kovalak had dressed and cared for him on Sunday, conducting him to the
Chapel for Mass that morning, taking him to and from his room to rest.
He had looked in again at Peter at nine Sunday night and found him
sleeping rather restlessly on his side instead of on his back as he
usually did. Eileen McCarthy had given him, as she did every night, a
glass of wine, and I suppose Hans made his usual facetious gesture with
the water pitcher, asking her to fill it for him. It makes me happy to
think how everyone was caring for him. And honored to do so, Jane always
said, when she spoke of Peter's needs. He was surrounded by loving care.
Fr. Faley brought him communion the days he could not get up, and it was
impressive, day after day at that sick bed, to hear those prayers, to
witness that slow dying. A King, a Pope, could have no more devoted
attention, than Fr. John Faley, who has been with us this past year,
gave Peter.

At eleven that night, Hans said, Peter began coughing, and it went on
for some minutes. Then he tried to rise, and fell over on his pillow,
breathing heavily. Hans put on the light and called Father Faley and
Jane. Michael, Eileen and others came too, and there were prayers for
the dying about the bedside. He died immediately, there was no struggle,
no pain. He was laid out at Newburgh the first night, in the conference
room where he had sat so often, trying to understand the discussions and
lectures. Flowers were all about him from shrubs in our garden and from
our neighbors. He wore for shroud a suit which had been sent in for the
poor. There was no rouge on his grey face which looked like granite,
strong, contemplative, set toward eternity. There was a requiem mass in
our chapel sung by Michael and Alan and the rest.

The next morning he was brought to Mott street and laid out at the end
of the store we use as an office. Tom Sullivan's desk was moved to make
way for it, and all the tables taken down at which the paper is usually
mailed out. The room had been scrubbed the night before by Rocky and
Tony and they had painted the rooms only a month ago, so everything was
fresh. (Rocky is a seaman, somewhat of a wandering monk, who had been
with the Trappists for a while. Anthony Aratari is a writer, painter and
craftsman who hopes some day to open a craft school in connection with
the C. W. It is his painting of Peter which hangs on the wall of the
office.)

All that day and night people came from all over the city, from the
neighborhood, from different parts of the country and filled the little
store and knelt before the coffin. Whenever we were sitting in the room,
we saw them quietly, almost secretly pressing their rosary beads to
Peter's hands. Some bent down and kissed him. My daughter, Tamar
Hennessy, came from West Virginia. David, who had accompanied Peter on
one of his last trips, stayed home with the three children, since Tamar
had known Peter the longest; since her sixth year, in fact.

The neighbors, three of them, sent tremendous floral pieces, made up of
carnations, gardenias and all around the coffin were the branches of
flowering shrubs they had sent down from the farm. The sweet smells
filled the room, and it was hot and fresh outside, clear weather, which
was lucky, since the house overflowed all through that day and night.
Priests came, from different orders, and led in the rosary. And all that
night we sat with him.

The funeral was at nine at Transfiguration Church down on Mott street.
Peter always loved the Salesians, and had always urged them to continue
opening craft schools and agricultural schools throughout the country.
He looked a bit like Don Bosco, their founder, himself. They were both
peasants. The pall bearers were John Filliger and Joe Hughes, both of
whom came to us during the seaman's strike in 1936, and have been with
us ever since; Bob Ludlow, our chief editorial writer, who more than any
other takes Peter's place here as a thinker and man of vision, and David
Mason, who is the editor of Peter's writings; and Arthur Sheehan, former
editor of the C.W., and Hazen Ordway, both dear and devoted friends.
Arthur had been one of the heads of the Boston group and St. Benedict's
farm at Upton, and Hazen had been librarian at the Marist Seminary in
Washington, when he heard me speak of the work there in 1937 and left
immediately to join us, being associated with us ever since.

Everyone, of course, wanted to be pall bearer, the church was full of
them, and the pall bearers themselves wanted diffidently to give way to
others. I had asked Tom Sullivan and Jack English, but there was only
room for six around the coffin.

Fr. Francis Meenan, Holy Ghost Father from Norwalk, Conn., sang the
Mass, with Fr. Divisio and Fr. Faley the deacons, and they and a group
of other priests, headed by Msgr. Nelson, met the body at the door and
ushered it into the Church. Everyone sang the requiem Mass together, the
organist, the priests, the seminarians, the parishioners, and all the
crowd at Mott street and at Maryfarm, Newburgh, and Ade Bethune, and
Jane O'Donnell and Serena and Stanley Vishnewsky and the group from
Easton, Victor and Jon and Chris--you could almost hear their individual
voices, and it was a loud and triumphant singing, with a note of joy,
because we were sure Peter heard us in heaven, were sure that angels and
saints joined in.

Peter was buried in St. John's Cemetery, Queens, in a grave given us by
Fr. Pierre Conway, the Dominican. Peter was another St. John, a voice
crying in the wilderness, and a voice too, saying, "My little children,
love one another." As the body was carried out of the church those great
and triumphant words rang out, the *In Paradisum.*

"May the angels lead thee into paradise; may the martyrs receive thee at
thy coming, and lead thee into the holy city of Jerusalem. May the choir
of angels receive thee, and mayest thou have eternal rest with Lazarus,
who once was poor."

Who Once Was Poor
=========

Which brings me back to some of the criticisms, the most strange
criticisms made of Peter--that he neglected the things of the spirit,
that he was always thinking in terms of the social order. "Only one
thing is needful, Peter," I heard one of his critics say brightly to him
one day. But Peter never saw affronts.

"We need to make the kind of society," he said simply, "where it is
easier for people to be good." And because his love of God made him love
his neighbor, lay down his life indeed for his brother, he wanted to cry
out against the evils of the day--the State, war, usury, the degradation
of man, the loss of a philosophy of work. He sang the delights of
poverty (he was not talking of destitution) as a means to making a step
to the land, of getting back to the dear natural things of earth and
sky, of home and children. He cried out against the machine because as
Pius XI had said, "raw materials went into the factory and came out
ennobled and man went in and came out degraded"; and because it deprived
a man of what was as important as bread, his work, his work with his
hands, his ability to use all of himself, which made him a whole man and
a holy man.

Yes, he talked of these material things. He knew we needed a good social
order where men could grow up to their full stature and be men. And he
also knew that it took men to make such a social order. He tried to form
them, he tried to educate them, and God gave him poor weak materials to
work with. He was as poor in the human material he had around him, as he
was in material goods. We are the offscourings of all, as St. Paul said,
and yet we know we have achieved great things in these brief years, and
not ours is the glory. God has chosen the weak things to confound the
strong, the fools of this earth to confound the wise.

Peter had been insulted and misunderstood in his life as well as loved.
He had been taken for the plumber and left to sit in the basement when
he had been invited for dinner and an evening of conversation. He had
been thrown out of a K. of C. meeting; one pastor who invited him to
speak demanded his money back which he had sent Peter for carfare to his
upstate parish, because, he said, we had sent up to him a Bowery bum and
not the speaker he expected. "This then is perfect joy," Peter could
say, quoting the words of St. Francis to Friar Leo, when he was teaching
him where perfect joy was to be found.

He was a man of sincerity and peace, and yet one letter came to us
recently, accusing him of having a holier than-thou attitude. Yes, Peter
pointed out that it was a precept that we should love God with our whole
heart and soul and mind and strength, and not just a counsel, and he
taught us all what it meant to be sons of God, and restored to us our
sense of responsibility as lay apostles in a chaotic world. Yes, he was
"holier than thou," holier than anyone we ever knew.

"Do not forget," Mary Frecon, head of the Harrisburgh house said before
she left, "Do not forget to tell of the roots of the little tree that
they cut through in digging his grave. I kept looking at those roots and
thinking how wonderful it is that Peter is going to nourish that
tree--that thing of beauty." The undertaker had tried to sell us
artificial grass to cover up "the unsightly grave," as he called it, but
we loved the sight of that earth that was to cover Peter. He had come
from the earth, as we all had and to the earth he was returning. Around
the grave we all said the rosary and after the Benedictus we left. Ade
de Bethune will do a stone for him.
