% Attica
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1971, 1.

*Summary: Reflects on the massacre of forty-two in the Attica prison
uprising and sees new repression and brutality forthcoming. Asks us to
reflect on Jesus who forgave his torturers. Suggests that no one would
know the majority profess being Christians in this country. (DDLW
\#512).*

In the prison uprising at Attica, New York, the news on September 15 was
of forty-two dead, prisoners, hostages and guards, all of them of
gunshot wounds. As to the atrocity stories of throat cuttings, how these
contributed to precipitate the attack on the prison, we do not yet know.
How much was dramatic threatenings and rhetoric? No guns were found in
the intensive search of the prison, so it is agreed that the prisoners
did not participate in the shootings. It was indeed a slaughter of a
body of desperate men, willing and knowing that it was inevitable that
they were going to lay down their lives in this protest. It was the
lives of many guards. There were indeed knives and homemade bombs of
some kind or another, and gasoline at hand to wreak further havoc, but
there were no guns and the deaths all were, as far as we know now, from
shootings. It was indeed a massacre. Now reflection begins which does
not seem to lead to less repression or any mitigation of the brutality
and savagery, or of the cold cruelty which makes up the lives of
prisoners and guards to a great extent. The main complaint of the
rioters was that they were not treated as men, but as beasts. They were
thrown into prisons and forgotten. Nobody cared. Eighty-five percent of
the prisoners at Attica were black or Puerto Rican.

All this morning the words have been in my mind, "What you have done to
the least of these, my brethren, you have done to me." How hard and
terrible a thing is the Christian religion, which teaches us that those
who take the sword will die by the sword, that we must forgive our
enemies, who are to be found in "our own household," Jesus Christ said.

We call ourselves Christian, we citizens of the United States, the
majority of us, but no one would ever know us as Christians. Reflect on
the life of Jesus who came to call sinners, who was born in poverty, who
lived as a worker for thirty years. He was an itinerant teacher, walking
the roads of Palestine, who hungered and thirsted and was fatigued to
the point of exhaustion, who was tempted in all things like us but He
did not sin, because He was also God. As the apostles said, we are
called to be other-Christs, we are called to put off the old man and put
on Christ, we are told to see Christ in our brother. Hard sayings and
who can understand it. Only the Spirit can teach us. It is some comfort
to remember those further words, when Christ himself died because His
whole way of life was revolutionary--He spoke them from the torture in
which He hung, nailed as He was to a cross--"Father, forgive them for
they know not what they do." And He also said to the thief dying by His
side, "This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise."

I hope all priests who have read in the papers and seen on television
these terrible happenings, will be offering Christ's holy sacrifice of
the Mass for our brothers who have had such a long enduring agony, which
led to their death.

I am afraid of what is before us, because what we sow we will reap. It
is an exercise in courage to write these words, to speak in this way
when it is revolting to consider how much we profess and how little we
perform. God help us.
