% On Pilgrimage - December 1972
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1972, 2, 8.

*Summary: An open letter to Fr. Dan Berrigan. Expresses her love and
gratitude for his and his brother's (Fr. Phil Berrigan) work for peace
and their influence on the young. Speaks of abortion and birth control
as genocide. Singles out sayings of Jesus on forgiveness and the
continuous need to confess one's sins. (DDLW \#526).*

Dear Father Dan Berrigan:

I woke up thinking of you this morning with love and regret at not
having been at the First Street Friday meeting--nor on the picket line
with you Saturday at Mother Cabrini's hospital on 19th Street. With
love, and gratitude too, for all you are doing--for the way you are
spending yourself. Thank God, how the young love you. You must be
utterly exhausted too, yet you keep going. I feel this keenly because
I've been really down and out since August, what the doctor calls a
chronic cough and a mild "heart failure," and I chafe at my enforced
absence because of a nervous exhaustion which I realize you must often
feel, though you are a generation or more younger than I.

But thank God, you are truly bearing the Cross, giving your life for
others, as Fr. Phil is in cramped cell and enforced idleness, away from
all he must crave day and night to do, surrounded by suffering, enduring
the clamor of hell itself--he too is giving his life for others.

I cannot tell you how I love you both, and see more clearly how God is
using you, reaching the prisoners and reaching the young. Now that I
have five great grandchildren and another on the way, I stress the
young. They all call you "Dan" and "Phil," but I call you Fr. Dan and
Fr. Phil because always you are to me priests and prophets. Remember how
you said once to me that you and Phil would never leave the priesthood
or your Orders as you had told your mother that Christmas?

Non-Resistance
--------------

Humanly speaking, your "violence" appeals to me--naturally
speaking--since we are creatures of body and soul, flesh and blood. (I
just heard a tape of your talk at the Catholic Worker house and it was
gentle!) But I feel Fr. McKenzie in his emphasis on non-resistance is
more right, naturally and supernaturally, than anyone in the peace
movement today. Yet he too is an angry man, a violent man and knows it.
I read his commentaries,, **The Two Edged Sword** and **The Power and the
Wisdom** constantly. And now we have his recent tape recording to listen
to which is put out by the Thomas More Mediatapes, 180 North Wabash
Avenue, Chicago, Ill., 60601. 1 believe that later it will be included
in a volume of essays.

I feel that, as in the time of the Desert Fathers, the young are fleeing
the cities--wandering over the face of the land, living after a fashion
in voluntary poverty and manual labor, seeming to be inactive in the
"peace movement." I know they are still a part of it--just as Cesar
Chavez and the Farm Workers' Movement is also part of it, committed to
non-violence, even while they resist, fighting for their lives and their
families' lives. (They, together with the blacks, feel and have stated
this, that birth control and abortion are genocide.)

I agree with them and say--make room for children, don't do away with
them. Up and down and on both sides of the Hudson River religious orders
own thousands of acres of land, cultivated, landscaped, but not growing
food for the hungry or founding villages for the families or schools for
the children.

How well I understand that Biblical phrase "in peace is my bitterness
most bitter." How to reconcile this with Jesus' new commandment of
non-resistance, of loving others, forgiving others seventy times seven--
forgiving and loving the enemies of our own household?

Once a monsignor, a generous donor to the CW, on hearing of one of our
dear and poverty stricken friends about to have her sixth child said,
"Not much self-control there!"

Another time I went with one of our CW mothers of eight children to the
large rectory of the parish to ask that the parish St. Vincent de Paul
Society help out with the rent and prevent the eviction of this family
of ten. The young mother weeping said, "There is not much food in the
house, either." The old pastor grunted, "You don't look as tho you've
been going hungry!" She had lost her figure with much child bearing, and
from finishing up the scraps the children left, as poor mothers do. But
no steaks, salads, fruits and cheese--not to speak of wines and
liqueurs--on the tables of the poor.

Yes, "in peace is my bitterness most bitter." Yet the bitterness
subsides and the peace in my heart grows, and even a love and some
understanding grows of these "enemies of our own household."

Parables
--------

I must tell little stories, as Jesus taught us to do in trying to teach.
They call it " reminiscing," when you are old. I do not undervalue my
wisdom, which my age (I begin my 76th year) and experience have taught
me.

The story is this. We had a mean pastor once long ago who was always
blasting women in his sermons for sitting around gossiping, not cleaning
their houses, and spending their husband-soldiers' pay on beer and
movies. It was during the Second World War. And there was a man in our
house of hospitality arrested for indecent exposure. The parish neighbor
who told me this called it "insulting a child," and I had thought she
said "assaulting" and nearly fainted with fear and trembling. With no
one else to turn to, I went to the pastor, the rigid and cranky one, and
asked him to go to the jail, visiting the prisoner being one of the
seven corporal works of mercy. With no comment at all but with the
utmost kindness and the delicacy of few words, he did as I requested and
interceded for this man off the road and got him a lighter sentence of
sixty days. When this happened once again some years later, another
priest, a saintly well-spoken one, was appealed to. He is reported to
have responded, "Too bad they don't give him a life sentence!"

You never can tell! But there are still, thank God, plenty of priests.
One can shop around, though it was not encouraged by those once known as
our "spiritual advisers." Perhaps they were right. Priests and laymen
educate one another over the years. Besides, in the country one is stuck
with one or two.

Besides--I believe. I believe in reading Scripture, studying it. And in
this case, taking to heart the story of the importunate widow and the
unjust judge, and the friend who made a tumult at the home of his
friend, demanding help. Keep asking for help.

I later learned from a famous psychiatrist, that these men (and what
child has not seen them) who expose themselves, seldom are dangerous,
and are often cured; and this man was, and died later in "a state of
grace"--as our comforting Catholic phrase puts it.

I hope we do not lose many subscribers because of my writing so frankly
about usually unreferred to portions of our anatomy. But nowadays when
there are no longer lines at the confessionals in our churches except at
the business district's noonday Masses, there surely is an overflowing
of public confessions. In our newspapers, reviews, advertisements and
novels "nothing is hidden it seems, that has not been revealed." It is
as tho the fear of death, and judgment day has made people rush to tell
all, to confess to each other, before the Dread judge shall tell all to
the universe. Poor, fearful creatures that we are, is it that in this
strange perverse way of confessing we are seeking Christ, even those who
deny Him? Jesus Christ is our truth. By telling the truth, or one aspect
of the truth, perhaps we are clinging to the hem of His garment, seeking
to touch it like the woman with the "issue of blood, so that we may be
healed.

Christ Is Truth
---------------

I am not wandering, in writing this way. I am meditating. I am thinking
of what I have come to think of as fundamental to our search for peace,
for non-violence. A flood of water (and Christ is living water) washes
out sins--all manner of filth, degradation, fear, horror. He is also the
Word. And studying the New Testament, and its commentators, have come in
this my 76' year, to think of a few holy words of Jesus as the greatest
comfort of my life.

"Judge not."

"Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us."

"Forgive seventy times seven times."

All words of our Lord and Saviour. "I have knowledge of salvation thru
forgiveness of my sins," Zacharias sang in his canticle.

And so, when it comes to divorce, birth control, abortion, I must write
in this way. The teaching of Christ, the Word, must be upheld. Held up
though one would think that it is completely beyond us--out of our
reach, impossible to follow. I believe Christ is our Truth and is with
us always. We may stretch towards it, falling short, failing seventy
times seven, but forgiveness is always there. He is a kind and loving
judge. And so are 99% of the priests in the confessional. The verdict
there is always "not guilty" even though our "firm resolve with the help
of His grace to confess our sins, do penance and amend our lives" may
seem a hopeless proposition. It always contains, that act of contrition,
the phrase "to confess our sins," even though we have just finished
confessing them, which indicates that the priest knows, and we know, and
we want to be honest about it, that we will be back in that
confessional, again and again.

I believe in the Sacraments. I believe grace is conferred thru the
Sacraments. I believe the priest is empowered to forgive sins. Grace is
defined as "participation in the divine life," so little by little we
are putting off the old man and putting on the new.

Actually, "putting on Christ."

P.S.--(To our readers). The day after I finished this letter I received
a letter from Father Phil--a good and loving letter. He is not discouraged, but strong in
courage. He will be released on parole on December 20, so let us all pray daily, and every
time we hear and see a reference to "The Berrigans" let us pray even if it is only the
briefest "God, be with them"--those words so familiar in our liturgy, to which the answer is, "And with you" and us too.

And dear Dan, Fr. Dan, please excuse my wandering like this.
