% On Pilgrimage - January 1973
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1973, 2, 6.

*Summary: Reflects on art and Dostoevsky's phrase "Beauty will save the
world." Laments the encroachment of the "totalitarian State," notes the
spread of tax resistance, and inveighs against the Vietnam War. Admires
the war resistance work of folk singer Joan Baez. (DDLW \#527).*

I write this in my room at Tivoli which looks out over the river which
is not yet full of ice floes as is usual at this time of the year. But
there was snow in the night and I shall be house-bound for a few days.
But Jan. 1-3 were three beautiful days of sun and thaw, and I walked a
bit and made a little garden in a glass dish of mosses and tiny plants.
C. S. Lewis in his autobiography **Surprised by Joy** describes just
such a tiny garden which his beloved brother gave him when they were
children.

"Beauty will save the world," Dostoievsky wrote. I just looked up this
quotation in Konstantin Mochulsky's **Dostoievsky, His Life and Work**.
Helene Iswolsky, our scholar in residence, attended his lectures in
Paris before the 2^nd^ World War. The book was translated by her friend
Michael Minihan, and dedicated to her and published by the Princeton
University Press in 1967. It is a mine of information about this
author's life and work.

In a paragraph on page 224, in speaking of art, Dostoievsky is quoted as
saying, "It has its own integral organic life" and it answers man's
innate need of beauty "without which, perhaps he might not want to live
upon earth."

"When a man is in discord with reality, in conflict . . . the thirst for
beauty and harmony appears in him with its greatest force. Art is useful
here because it pours in energy, sustains the forces, strengthens our
feeling of life . . . Man accepts beauty without any conditions and so,
simply because it is beauty, with veneration he bows down before it, not
asking why it is useful and what one can buy with it . . . Beauty is
more useful than the simply useful, for it is the ultimate goal of
being. On this height, the way of art meets with the way of religion."

Peter Maurin talked much of a new synthesis of "cult, culture and
cultivation," and I think he emphasized these ideas because he was a
French peasant, always close to the soil, an great reader, scholar and
teacher, and had done the ugliest and most laborious of manual labor
(giving up his original profession as teacher to emphasize St.
Benedict's philosophy of work).

It was Jack English who, in one of his letters from the Trappist
Monastery in Georgia, wrote to me that line from Dostoievsky's notebook,
"Beauty will save the world."

Interviewings
-------------

Because the CW persists in its program of the *personal* practice of
"works of mercy" (the most direct opposition to works of war), we have
had much publicity of late, and the time which was supposed to mean
"rest" for me has been interrupted by interviews and visits of
French-Canadian and American television crews. But it has been
interesting, too. They seem to have enjoyed their assignment, and we
naturally love those who love us. (The National Educational Television
Network plans to present a view of the Catholic Worker on the evening of
January 23.)

The American crew expressed the fear of more government repression of
free speech in radio, television and press--a very real threat today.

They know of our own conflict with the IRS. We live in what we can only
regard as a temporary truce. We have not applied for or received tax
exemption. The letter we received (and published) from the N.Y. State
Offices of the IRS stated:

"After examining your financial records and reviewing your activities
for the above years (1966-1970), we find that you are not required to
file annual returns for the years shown, and no further action is
necessary regarding the proposals in our letter of January 17, 1972.

"Thank you for your cooperation.

Sincerely yours,  
District Director  
Internal Revenue Service"

The Washington official representative who met with us conveyed to us
the respect they held for our religious principles and assured us that
the presented bill for almost $300,000 could be ignored. The matter
would be dropped, it was indicated (but, "for the present" was the
qualifying clause in my own mind).

Mr. Nixon's first statement that he would attack the problem of
"permissiveness" was a warning note. The jailing of newspaper reporters,
the Ellsberg trial--in fact, any criticisms of government policies or
actions was going to meet with repressive measures.

The tax refusal movement all over the country grows. The conflict
between State and people is coming out into the open here in the United
States. The Totalitarian State is not just Germany (Hitler), Italy
(Mussolini) and the USSR (Stalin), but is here and now with the "all
encroaching State" as our Catholic bishops once called it, involving
China and ourselves, as well as Russia.

The State
---------

"A thousand years are as one day" in the history of the Church, so of
course the Church has not gotten very far in the solving of this problem
which started with Constantine. Actually if the State, City, and the
whole secular world with its "inspector generals" and bureaucracies did
not demand our conformity to such insane standards of luxury, Holy
Mother the Church would not have to be pleading for funds for schools,
and books, and buses, and health and welfare aids. (As St. Hilary wrote
a thousand, (or a few days) ago, "The less we ask of Caesar, the less we
will have to render to Caesar." This was his commentary on Jesus'
words--"Render to Caesar the things of Caesar and to God the things of
God.")

How good it would be to see the Church closer and closer to poverty and
the poor; little schools set up on every block, in idle rooms, in empty
buildings, with the students themselves helping repair them and getting
meanwhile some sense of the joy of manual labor (and the pains of it,
too). And idle Church-owned lands given over to the disorderly poor, the
unworthy poor, to build up little villages of huts, tepees, log cabins,
yes, even outhouses. Which might come to resemble (if a Church of sorts
were built in the center) an ancient Irish monastery. Ireland used to be
called the land of Saints and Scholars.

Actually, we see some of these attempts today in "communes" all over the
country and among the dreamers, the "freaked out." Even the shacks of
the farm workers on the lands of the growers could be made into a
community of common purpose--"to make the kind of society where it is
easier to be good."

Overcoming our enemies is slow work indeed. Loving our enemies is
commanded of us by Christ. And I can lie here on my couch on a snowy
January afternoon and dream dreams, and write this letter to our
readers. But of course our greatest enemy is ourselves, our lethargy,
our neglect of those most powerful means--prayer and fasting (and the
sacraments).

The War
-------

Actually I was trying as I began writing about my little terrarium, to
comfort myself, because of the horror of our times, these times of
savagery, lies, greed--and implacable determination on the part of one
man not to be "the first President to lose a war."

In the sordid ugliness of our slums one can find beauty in the clouds,
in a clear sky, as Ruskin said. Tom Sullivan's article in this issue
recalled to me the beauty of a human being who had been thru war and the
humiliation of beatings in a prison camp and who sat by the bedside of a
dying woman, Peggy Baird, my old friend, and drank with her and talked
literature with her and when she said she wanted to die a Catholic
brought out that beautiful old Baltimore Catechism and "brought her into
the Church."

He lived thru the horror--he was also involved in contributing to the
horror, as each and everyone of us Americans are now, one way or
another. We are all guilty. "He who says he is without sin is a liar,"
Scripture says, as a dear black neighbor on First Street, clutching my
hand, assured me last month. And don't we all know it!

Joan Baez
---------

Joan Baez, who sang at two of my meetings on the West Coast last winter,
went to Hanoi and miraculously lived thru those bombings last month. She
and a few others, acting as postmen for the prisoners of war, brought
and returned with letters. Yes, the world will be saved by such beauty,
such courage! She stood on a balcony in Hanoi and sang to the people in
the midst of this inhuman war. How could she keep that heavenly voice of
hers from trembling with the fear she confessed to enduring all thru her
visit? She has suffered imprisonment (and her mother, too) in protesting
this longest war in U.S. history.

I hope you have all seen those pictures of her accompanying the children
in Birmingham, Alabama, as they faced up to, marched against, police
dogs and men lined up some years ago against demonstrating women and
children of the South in a racial and class war which goes on still, and
is even more prevalent in the North.

Reading is an escape from agony. Solzhenitsyn's works--**The Cancer
Ward**, **The First Circle**; Harrison Salisbury's **The 900 Days**,
**The Siege of Leningrad**. Such books remind one that in such crises
today man often is of indomitable spirit. "There is that which is of God
in every man," the Quakers say.

Rejoice! Phil is Free!
----------------------

He came to us, as his brother Fr. Dan Berrigan did last spring, to say
Mass at St. Joseph's House, First Street, the day after his release from
Danbury Federal Prison.

Father Phil Berrigan is now with his Community, a Josephite parish in
Baltimore, where our beloved Fr. Pacifique Roy used to live. I received
a rejoicing letter from Brendan and Will Walsh, our Catholic Worker
fellow workers in Baltimore. Remember, St. Paul wrote: "Rejoice, and
again I say rejoice!" Maybe, if we pray hard enough we can bring about a
purifying defeat for our country, and begin a new life, at home, and
stop making instruments of war.

I'd like to end with a beautiful quote from Rosemary Haughton--a
reminder for each and all of us:

"There are not many ways to God, but only one, and it lies through the
depth of a man's own soul, when he leaves his false self behind, and
stripped, and alone like the myth heroes--goes into the darkness. The
darkness may be a catastrophe, personal or communal, or it may be the
yearly, daily round of ordinary living, continued when the first
enthusiasm has died and there seems no reason to go on and do right
except clinging to a laughable conviction that there is something worth
going on for. And in the depth of this darkness is Christ, who passed
from the world and the flesh that we know into the complete world and
the whole man."
