% On Pilgrimage - May 1973
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1973, 1, 8.

*Summary: Series of reflections on the occasion of their 40th
anniversary. Laments little time to read, recalls the books Peter Maurin
recommended and his constant agitating. Notes the primacy of conscience,
defends critics of the Pope, and the need for Christ rooms. Keywords:
Philosophy of the CW, obedience, folly of the cross (DDLW \#529).*

This issue celebrates our fortieth anniversary. And the psalm verse
comes to mind, "Thy youth shall be renewed like the eagle's."

I can apply that to the Catholic Worker which over the years is renewed
and revitalized year after year. Peter Maurin said once, quoting Ibsen,
"The truth should be restated every twenty years."

That line sticks in my mind, journalist that I am. Christ is our
Truth--"True God and true man, like unto us in all things save sin."
When I was a little girl I used to wish I'd hurry and grow up so that
I'd not "sin" any more. Of course, I did not use that word--probably it
was "be bad"--because most children have a keen sense of right and
wrong.

"The truth should be restated"--which phrase means, in my mind, that we
have to take truths--statements, dogmas--which are old and stale, and
develop them in the light of growing knowledge and understanding which
we gain from experience and our contacts with those around us.

The Catholic Worker House of Hospitality and Farm is a school, as well
as a flophouse, a soupline, which we sometimes contemplate with despair
and think, "Can't we ever get beyond this? Is this *all* we can do? When
are we going to read, study, enrich ourselves with all this stimulating
thought Peter Maurin has given us glimpses of? When are we going to get
a chance to read **Personalism** by Emmanuel Mounier, that young man who
started **Esprit** in Paris the same year the **CW** started, and the
book Peter Maurin was the first to translate into English? Mounier died
young, but he lived fully and accomplished much for 'the clarification
of thought' that Peter talked of as the first step in 'rebuilding the
social order.' When can we read **Fields, Factories and Workshops,
Mutual Aid, Diary of a Revolutionist** by Kropotkin, the philosophical
anarchist? And now there is also Teilhard de Chardin, also a personalist
who has much to teach us."

Souplines, Houses
-----------------

The books will always be there. If we give up many other distractions,
we can turn to them. We can browse among the millions of words written
and often just what we need can nourish us, enlighten us, strengthen
us--in fact, be our food just as Christ, the Word, is also our food.

It is an amazing thing that the soup line still goes on, that college
students, seminarians, nuns, priests have taken to manual work, raising
food as at the farm--many for the first time putting their hands in the
soil, to the plough, to kneading the dough, reroofing a building,
leveling roads, serving tables, washing dishes, "trying to make that
sort of society where it is easier for man to be good." (When I say
"man," remember St. Paul writes "there is neither Jew nor Greek, bond
nor free, male nor female.") We are all one, "members of one another,
and when the health of one member suffers, the health of the whole body
is lowered." Yet each person is so unique, so loveable. (It is no wonder
they don't like to be written about.)

Besides, living as we do with men and women of all ages who "come
in"--some staying to help, others moving on--it is not right to
discriminate. But of course there are some who come to give their time
and talents and stay for longer or shorter periods, as in a school.

Peter's Recommendations
-----------------------

Certainly it is the first time many young students have become
acquainted with the "man in the street"--so much talked of. Peter Maurin
quotes Cardinal Newman as saying, "If you wish to reach the man in the
street, go to the man in the street."

The first recommendation of Peter Maurin in outlining his program was
"round table discussions for clarification of thought." (Of course, he
conducted them everywhere--on park benches, in Bowery restaurants, in
discussions with professors at Columbia University, and with priests and
bishops, not only at social action conferences, but in visits to
episcopal residences. I must not forget his calls on John Moody and
Thomas Woodlock on Wall Street.)

He would have liked to see in me another Catherine of Siena who would
boldly confront bishops and Wall Street magnates. I disappointed him in
that, preferring the second step in his program, reaching the poor
through the works of feeding, clothing and sheltering, in what he called
"houses of hospitality" (where the works of mercy could be carried out).

Since the works of mercy are the opposite of the works of war (where
food supplies are flooded and bombed out, shelters destroyed, and
clothing burnt off the backs of men, women and children by napalm), we
were almost immediately involved in anti-war work, some of which took us
to jail. Going to jail is a spiritual work of mercy--visiting the
prisoner on a grass-roots level.

God's Messengers
----------------

George Woodcock in his review in the **Nation**, March 19, of William
Miller's book **A Harsh and Dreadful Love** states that he "cannot think
of being at one with a state of mind that can see the Pope as 'Our Dear
Sweet Christ on Earth.'" (I do not know why he capitalized this phrase
except that it makes it look more ridiculous.) Evidently he does not
know Catherine of Siena or her times, far worse times than these for
popes and the Church. In fact, there were three men contending for that
office, and Catherine, backing one of them, who had fled to Avignon,
kept urging him by letter and by visits to France (on foot) to return to
his job of being head of the Church. She tempered her strong criticisms
and rebukes by calling him, at times, "our dear, sweet Christ on earth."
In other words, she was trying to seek concordances, and some political
and spiritual solution for the troubles of the day. She was trying to
make him forgive her effrontery by reminding him of his responsibility
as one who sat in the chair of Peter, the same Peter who had denied
Christ three times, who had no desire to wash the feet of others. Peter
looked for power as James and John did. After the descent of the Dove,
he changed. (Many another Pope has reminded us of eagles and vultures
rather than the Dove, the symbol of Peace as well as of the Holy
Spirit.)

We are all supposed to see Christ in each other. "Inasmuch as you have
done it unto the least (or worst) of these my brethren, ye have done it
unto Me." It is hard to see the dear sweet Christ in many a pestering
drunk that comes in demanding attention. "Love is a harsh and dreadful
thing, for Jesus to ask of us." "You love God as much as the one you
love the least." These staggering, unlovely, filthy ones who come in
waving a bottle at you and cursing you, and saying "Peter Maurin started
theses places for the likes of us!" are God's messengers. I am reminded
of the classic story of St. Teresa of Avila who, when she fell off her
stumbling mule into the shallow river and cried out to God in protest,
heard Him say, "This is the way I treat my friends" (a sardonic or a
humorous God?). And she flung back at him, "That is why you have so few
of them." It has the flavor of Hasidism--that tale.

To go on, having been "turned on" by Mr. Woodcock's review. He takes up,
as many have taken up, my oft-quoted statement, perhaps as well
remembered by non-Catholic readers as any remark I have ever made, that
if the Chancery Office ordered me to stop publishing the **Catholic
Worker**, I would do so.

Such a statement needs clarification, of course. My understanding of the
teaching of the Church is that we must follow our conscience, even an
erroneous conscience. My reading of Cardinal Newman confirms that. I
think it is in Bouyer's life of Newman that he quotes Newman as saying
he drank a toast to "conscience first, the Pope second." My
conscientious reasoning, if asked to cease publishing, would be this: I
may be held responsible for what goes in the paper, but I am a member of
an unincorporated association of the Catholic Worker, made up of a very
active group of young people who so ardently esteem the ideas of Peter
Maurin that right now they are adding a few of his Easy Essays at the
end of our evening recitation of Vespers in the basement of our New York
house of hospitality. Whatever happened to me, I could count on them to
carry on Peter's program, founded on a new synthesis of cult, culture
and cultivation. They would be a group, amongst whom always the one
would be looked to as leader who works the hardest at "being what you
would have the other fellow be," who takes responsibility and
perseveres, does not grow weary, rejoices in tribulations, who knows
how, "when there is no love to put love, and so find love" (St. John of
the Cross)--and so the work would go on. Its "youth would be renewed
like the eagle's," to use that happy psalm verse.

Yes, I can well see myself obeying--and under the cloak of obedience,
sit in a rocking chair on a porch and watch the majestic Hudson and its
ships pass by; and read, and write more. What kind of obedience would
that be? A joy indeed.

The Folly of the Cross
----------------------

I am glad that Mr. Woodcock knows and appreciates Dostoyevsky as he
does. I am glad that Lewis Mumford, in a television interview with Bill
Moyers, says he reads over once a year Fr. Zossima's instructions to his
monks (in **The Brothers Karamazov**).

I do not think I could have carried on with a loving heart all these
years without Dostoyevsky's understanding of poverty, suffering and
drunkenness. The drunken father of Sonya in **Crime and Punishment**,
the story Grushenka told in **The Brothers Karamazov** about the
depraved sinner "who gave away an onion," the little tailor who took in
the honest thief, sharing his corner of a room--all this helped me to an
understanding of St. Paul's "folly of the cross"--that passionate,
suffering St. Paul who is still criticized today, even as our present
"dear sweet Christ on earth" is, Paul VI.

Our anarchism stems from Kropotkin. (Peter Maurin introduced me to
**Fields, Factories and Workshops, Mutual Aid** and **The Conquest of
Bread**. I had only read his "Life of a Revolutionist" which ran in the
**Atlantic Monthly** years ago.) Our anarchism is that of a Lewis
Mumford, or a Paul Goodman, a decentralist, personalist point of view.
Peter Maurin's function as teacher and leader of the Catholic Worker
movement was to translate for us Emmanuel Mounier's "Personalist
Manifesto," to talk to us about the Personalist-Communitarian Revolution
which Mounier wrote about in **Esprit**. Martin Corbin, who is the
scholar in the CW movement, has all Mounier's works in French and is
trying to get more of his writings translated. (Mounier's last book,
**Personalism**, is in paperback, published by the Notre Dame Press,
Indiana. Get it.)

A further note: When I spoke of loving the unlovable and cited the drunk
who was abusing us a few paragraphs back, I was also thinking of one who
shouted at one of our volunteers--"With all that publicity you got this
year on television (Bill Moyers' program) you're taking in millions of
dollars and all you give us is a bowl of soup."

But of course, aside from a few bequests of a thousand dollars, we have
not been overwhelmed with donations. We've had enough to keep going on.
With inflation, increased mailing and printing costs, a staggering
increase in rents and food costs, carfares, daily supplies, etc., we
just get along.

Christ-Rooms Needed
-------------------

We are daily tormented by the need for a woman's shelter. There are so
many shopping-bag women sleeping on the streets or in empty buildings.
But from sad experience of building codes, fire and health department
requirements, we know the costs would be astronomical. The house we are
in now cost us \$35,000, \$15,000 down and two mortgages, one of which
is now paid off, and the additional costs of architects' plans
(according to building code requirements) added $45,000 for the
rebuilding before we got a certificate of occupancy.

What I would like to see is a house for women, with each woman having
her separate room with key--an old convent, for instance, with separate
cells. The Episcopalian Church used to run a shelter for women,
dormitory style with double decker beds, on Stanton Street. They gave it
up and the Salvation Army took it over. They charged 45 cents a night. There
is no shelter there for man nor woman now. The Joan of Arc Residence,
which I once stayed at between movings, is very good, but packed to the
doors. Besides, the kind of women we have will not give up their
shopping bags, discarded clothes picked out of trash cans, which they
would fight like tigers to hold on to. To keep them they will sleep in
doorways and empty buildings. In winter they wear four coats to keep
warm, and lug them around all summer in anticipation of the future cold.
And we must bear the consequences of our permissiveness in our own
house, by periodic outbreaks of cockroaches, head lice, and other kinds,
too. Woe is me!

So we will hug our personalist philosophy to us, and go on talking of a
Christ-room in every house, and are rewarded most recently by one of our
friends taking in one of our guests. Each one takes one. There is always
somebody, somewhere, for each one. Let us get them together.

Marge Hughes, with a population at the Farm of one hundred over the
Easter holiday and more comings and goings with summer, looks longingly
at a neighboring farm where there could be a tent colony and many
organic gardens. The beginnings of an agronomic university such as Peter
Maurin talked of? Perhaps.
