% On Pilgrimage - June 1973
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1973, 2, 8.

*Summary: Diary-like paragraphs for the month--peace meetings, walks,
reading, a visit to her daughter and grandchildren in Vermont, planting,
and prayers. (DDLW \#530).*

St. Joseph's House:  
**May 2**--Today everything is peaceful around the house
at First Street. No drunkeness, madness, quarrelling, as on May first,
our fortieth anniversary. Mass at 5:30 just before supper is a
joy--eight of us there. Vespers are beautiful, and we have in addition
to a short Scripture reading, a shot reading from Peter Maurin's Essays.

Sometimes the house is like the reception ward at Bellevue Psychiatric.
One can only bow one's head to the storm and pray. The Jesus prayer
helps me.

**May 3**--I took the 3:00 p.m. train to Tivoli and read all the way.
Some of the Peacemaker Group are already here. Margot Barnet of CNVA,
Voluntown, Connecticut and Larry Aaronspere from Heathcote Center,
Freeland, Maryland. Chuck Mathei is co-ordinator. A group of thirty or
forty is expected. Emphasis around the country seems to be on land
trusts. Land for the landless. The Peacemaker has already led the way by
acquiring three pieces of land in West Virginia. Responsible people
lease it for use, to raise food as far as possible.

**May 4**--Peacemakers arise at seven and breakfast; the first
conference is at eight. I cannot get to the meetings. This morning I
listened to tapes--the book of Acts, and one conference of Thomas
Merton. Much mail, and I'm delinquent when it comes to mail. I delay
answering--sometimes there are so many visitors, telephone calls, and
just living with seventy or more people takes time. I take to my room,
hide out, as it were, and tremble when I look at my desk. Please excuse
me, all our readers whom I have neglected. Let this be a letter to you
all. (Subscriptions should be sent to First Street in N.Y.)

**May 5**--Went for a walk in the woods and picked dockweed and
dandelion along the way, for greens for supper. Then sudden news--a
phone call from Vermont that Eric and Jo-Ann had a baby boy, Shawn, my
seventh great grandchild. Rejoicings. Nick and Brenda have three
children, the middle one a boy, Jude. Becky has Lara, two years old, and
Susie has Tanya and Kachina, so there is a preponderance of girls.

Mary Lathrop is visiting Tivoli and painted a beautiful miniature ikon
for part of her homework (a Scripture class at Fordham; she graduates
this month). Father Andy and Marty Corbin drove to Toronto to speak at
an anarchist conference there.

**May 6, Sunday**--Father Cletus, S.J. said Mass this morning. Mary
Durnin is here from Milwaukee. Mike Cullen is ordered deported;
appealing the case.

**May 7**--Cold and rainy one day, hot and sunny the next. Peacemakers
are suffering from colds, sleeping in Peter Maurin house, 35 degrees at
night. Stanley gave his slide show tonight--the story of the CW.

**May 8**--A class in a Sioux City Franciscan college interviewed me
over the phone this afternoon. It was not too hard--a half hour of talk
and questions and answers. Wrote letters till midnight. I wrote to
Martin Sostre, who has been in solitary for eight years in Auburn
Prison. Father Andy mentions him in the brief article he wrote on the
anarchist conference which is in this issue. So little we can do! But
letter writing is a work of mercy, too, so I hope he gets much mail.

**May 11**--Reading **Man Born to be King** by Dorothy Sayers, published
by Eerdman's in Michigan. She and Rosemary Haughton are theologians,
Scripture scholars and philosophers! Pat Rusk reminds me that Lady
Abbesses in the middle ages (see Sigrid Undset's **Stages on the Road**)
were practically Bishops.

**May 15**--Drove with Mike Kreyche and Rita through a downpour to the
home and printshop of Daniel Bobrow, a Russian friend who lives up in
the hills in back of Rhinebeck and has one hundred acres of untilled
land. Father Clarence Duffy, now in Ireland, used to camp out there and
tried to start a farming community. Mr. Bobrow, a gifted man of sixty,
has been ill with London flu (which I think has been my longstanding
complaint, but it has now left me). We were visiting to suggest he let
us use some of his land--lease it or rent it? Is he interested in land
trusts? Our eighty-six acres at Tivoli are woody hillside and a few
fields, all ploughed, planted and well occupied by our young people.

Bob Fitch writes of California's first National Land Reform Conference
in San Francisco, a coalition of Chicanos, Indians, farmers, former New
Dealers working for distribution of land. Also through the Peacemaker
conference we heard of a new paper, **Maine Land Trust**, Box 116,
Brunswick, Me. 04011. It calls attention to the beginnings of other land
trusts in Vermont and New Hampshire, and Massachusetts. So far
everything seems to be on paper. Except the Peacemakers'.

**May 17, Thursday**--Left at ten for Vermont and arrived at two p.m.
The car did not shimmy on the turnpikes, but it was hard going on the
other roads. I found that the music room in Tamar's house, which used to
be Eric's and is now filled with potted plants and rubber trees, and
looking out on a greenhouse which Tamar and Hilaire constructed, had
been prepared for me. The grandchildren had tried to cover up the gun
rack of the boys' hunting rifles by hanging over them a beautiful spread
Tamar wove, but the butts protruded! Everyone, Becky and John, Mary,
Maggie, Martha, Hilaire and Katy all have been working valiantly
planting potatoes, corn, beans, and transplanting from the greenhouse.
We had fresh asparagus, potatoes and cheese, rhubarb for dessert, and
Nicky and his friends have been bringing in a dozen perch and brook
trout a day! Jimmy is working long hours in a local garage.

**May 19, Saturday**--The Hennessy family has twenty-five acres (or is
it twenty-three), and there are ominous rumors going around about their
neighbor who owns all the land above and below their house, barn and
twenty or so acres, selling out to real estate speculators who want to
put up condominiums and would like to pressure Tamar into selling.
Vermont has become vacationland, ski resort, hunting and fishing
territory. It used to be seventy-five per cent cultivated; now the farms
are gone, and it is only twenty-five per cent cultivated. The Hennessy
family raises all the food it can. They have twenty-five hens, some
ducks, and there are two young Alpine goats, and they are looking for a
couple of milk goats. John works in a machine shop (he is a gifted tool
maker), works nights, and is building his own place on one acre of the
land.

**May 24**--Eric brought over Shawn, less than a month old. His
eighteen-year-old mother is out shopping . . . A great day for planting
potatoes, onion sets, comfrey. Maggie is mulching, driving the tractor
John bought, dragging a home-built cart full of the mulch to the field.
The others do the pitchforking from barn to cart, and from cart to
field.

Katy, thirteen, is reading, for the third time, the Tolkien books. She
gave me **The Hobbit** to read, and my visit has been like the first
chapter of that book when fourteen dwarfs arrived one by one, when he
expected only one visitor. Brenda and Nicky came often with their three,
Rhonda, her sister, with two sturdy boys. Some campers also arrived to
sleep in the barn--there were great comings and goings, like at Tivoli.
Everyone is a car hopper these days, so the four-hour trip which
separates Tivoli and Perkinsville seems like nothing.


**May 29**, New York (First Street)--It looks now as though my summer will
be spent in New York, or its immediate vicinity (Staten Island). A
meeting with a priest from The Catholic Charities who was at the Cesar
Chavez festival at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine last month, and
our conversation about homeless women who sleep in doorways and empty
buildings, led to a resolution on my part to start work at once to find
a house for them. A letter from a Trappist Abbott containing a down
payment for a house, the need for which we had emphasized in the May
**Catholic Worker**, confirmed my decision. We should be nearby, so our
volunteer help will contribute their youth and strength, and we want
something between a Bowery flop-house and an old fashioned convent,
where every woman will have little rooms of their own to keep their
shopping carts and bags and such like small household goods. A large
recreation room would be a help. At the Mott St. and Chrystie St. houses
when Leonard Austin or Kieran Dugan brought records and called the folk
dances, we all danced a Virginia reel together on occasion! We welcome
any suggestions, as to available sites for our new venture.

A long paragraph in the introduction to Dostoievsky's **Possessed**, and
a remembrance of Mrs. Jellyby in **Bleak House**, make me put aside this
month all references to Cambodia, Laos, Watergate, etc. "Least said,
soonest mended," my mother used to say. We all talk too much and do too
little. God help us!
