% On Pilgrimage - October/November 1975
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October-November 1975, 1, 8.

*Summary:*

Fondly recalls Sister Aloysia who guided her preparation for Baptism,
mentions tax resistance, and the enthusiasm of a convention of 16,000
charismatic Catholics whom she wishes would embrace peace activities,
rejection of war, and income tax resistance. However, she admires their
return to Scripture and communitarian spirit. Keyword: Pentecostal (DDLW \#557).

Awakening one fall morning, at daybreak, I suddenly wanted to go to New
York. I had been at the farm in Tivoli for some weeks. (It is a good
place to be and there are visitors, letters to answer, writing to do,
and peace and quiet to do it in.) Often when I am there I feel guilty to
be escaping the noise and turmoil of the Lower East Side, and the sadly
crowded house of hospitality. But it was not guilt which made me take
off for New York. Tommy Hughes was driving to the city and impulsively I
went along. I arrived in time for the five-thirty mass.

Saint Elizabeth Seton
---------------------

There I had a sudden overwhelming realization that I had been brought
down to the city to participate in the Mass at our Nativity Church on
Second Avenue, in honor of the about-to-be-canonized saint, Elizabeth
Ann Seton! The next morning, I went to the Mass for the
Spanish-speaking, where men, women and children, even the man who passed
the collection basket, sang joyously, participating most truly in the
Holy Sacrifice. In the afternoon, I sat engrossed before a television
set which made us all present in Rome, at St. Peter's where the great
ceremony was taking place. When the day was over, I felt that I had
truly been at the canonization of someone to whom I felt was close
indeed.

There was a special reason for this. There was a humble little sister on
Staten Island, retired after years of teaching second grade, who lived
down the beach at St. Joseph's by the Sea (now a busy academy, but then
a place for old, retired sisters). She used to slip over to see me when
she could, to help me study a penny catechism, as it used to be called,
to become a member of the Catholic Church. I had met her on the road
between our bungalow and the Sister's home.

The year before she had introduced me to a young priest who baptized my
infant daughter. So it was Sister Aloysia Mary (or Mary Aloysia?), one
of the daughters of St. Elizabeth Ann Seton, who kept after me with
unflagging perseverance, bringing me all kinds of Catholic "propaganda,"
from the Messenger of the Sacred Heart to the lives of the saints.

She was a dear, God rest her soul, and what would I have done without
her! She brought me also my first glimpse of the liberty of the children
of God, the children of the Church, (which Lenny Bruce said once was the
only **THE** Church in America). Nothing daunted her, neither my
Communist friends, nor my purely atheist friends, some of whom lived on
the beach too, all close friends who observed the progress of my
conversion with interest. They were not surprised -- "Dorothy had always
been too religious in her attitudes," they said.

Dear Sisters of Charity, dear Sister Aloysia, how grateful I always will
be to you! "Superstitious" as I am, I am sure that it was a nudge from
the departed friend and counsellor, Sister Aloysia, that impelled me to
go to New York that beautiful weekend of celebrations.

We have friends amongst these Sisters now, together with other Orders,
who are helping us to get our new women's house, Maryhouse, started on
Third Street. Sisters of Charity have contributed beds, thirty of them.
Sisters of Charity come down to help us in their spare time. Sister
Margaret Dowling, head of the entire order, has contributed
substantially to the repairs called for. God bless them all.

Nonviolence
-----------

I'd like to call special attention to a story in this issue of the paper
-- it is Peggy Scherer's story, on the front page, of the Peacemaker
victory. (It is the completed story of the news box which appeared on
page three of the last issue.) It is a story of gentle persistence, the
power of Truth -- faith in Truth (remembering that Christ is our Truth).
He is the Way, the Truth, the Life.

Chuck Matthei had told me the story of his interviews with the head of
the Internal Revenue Service, the almost daily dialogue that went on
between them, and the frank and "manly" admission, made finally by the
IRS chief, that a mistake had been made, that the Peacemakers had Truth
on their side. I felt a great sense of joy and thanksgiving, a sense of
hope too, that our officials in Washington D.C. **could** be approached
in this way -- with dignity and perseverance, with courtesy, with the
recognition that we are all, each one of us, whether government official
or radical (one who gets to the **roots** of things), children of God.
We do believe that we are all brothers and sisters. We believe, too,
that we can only show our love for God by our love for our brothers and
sisters. So we share our joy with you, our readers, and hope we all have
a sense of renewed strength and energy to continue our opposition to all
violence, to all wars.

We point out that one way not to have to pay income tax, so much of
which goes to the military, into stockpiling, into sales of weapons to
other countries, is to seek more ways of living a life of voluntary
poverty, to follow our Lord Jesus and his loveable servant St. Francis.

Pentecostal Meeting
-------------------

Last month, I drove to Atlantic City with Alice and Joan from the
Catholic Worker farm at Tivoli, to attend the regional meeting of the
Charismatics, as everybody now terms the Pentecostal movement. I love
the word Pentecost because Pentecost is my favorite feast in the Church.
I was confirmed on that day with a large group of adults and felt it to
be the happiest moment in my life. Even more than on the day of my
conditional baptism into the Catholic Church I felt **sure**, settled,
and convinced in the Way which stretched ahead of me. That was a few
years before I met Peter Maurin, the founder of the CW movement. My
confirmation prepared me for that meeting.

The meeting was an amazing coming together of 16,500 people at Atlantic
City. Always I had distrusted crowds, mass enthusiasm. Peter Maurin once
gave us a book to read called **The Devil's Share**, by de Rougement
which told of mass movements and people's desire to be swayed,
influenced, "beside themselves," swept by a common joy as in a football
game or a baseball game. Mobs, lynching mobs, too, feel this singleness
of purpose. Something takes possession of them at such times, de
Rougement points out. Fr. Ronald Knox wrote a book called **Enthusiasm**
years ago, about mass movements in the church, and many Catholics
thought the Catholic Worker movement was tarred with than brush, it
might be said.

I had been to two charismatic meetings and had found only a profound joy
and sense of prayer, and a deep concern for our brothers and sisters.
One meeting was at Ann Arbor at the Newman club of the University of
Michigan, and the communal prayer and the beauty of the singing
impressed me and Lou Murphy of the Detroit House of Hospitality. The
other meeting was in a small Mexican settlement situated on top of a
mountainous dump, across the river from El Paso, Texas. A group of us
drove across the border one Saturday morning. (I was travelling home to
New York by bus, with stop overs, after my ten days in a California
prison camp during the United Farm Workers struggle against an
injunction against picketing.)

There I encountered Mexicans across our border in a most miserable
condition of destitution, living in rags on these dumps managed by a
contractor, who paid the Mexicans to scavenge for old iron, metals,
bottles and other trash. The average family, with all members working,
could earn barely enough to feed themselves. It was on the top of this
hill of junk that a small, cement block shed with no windows, only open
spaces, was their little chapel. Benches were built from bits of lumber.
A confessional had been set up, perhaps constructed from the wreck of an
old car, and there men and women went to confession, while those left in
the chapel sang their joyous hymns and awaited the Mass.

After the Eucharist there was a sharing of clothes brought by the group
from El Paso, and a small grocery cooperative was set up where
hundred-pound sacks of beans and rice made up the produce. It was a long
and beautiful morning. It was not just social work. It was a sharing, a
visit, a day of festival. Children were often taken to picnics and
Passion Plays and festivals, I heard. There was a close contact between
these two disparate groups. Of Course medical needs were cared for too.
Much work was being done by this dedicated group of young people. But it
was also an example of their sense of the **primacy of the spiritual**.
The El Paso group was giving the best they had and they paid their
Mexican brothers and sisters the compliment of recognizing that they too
rejoiced in the primacy of the spiritual.

I spoke of these experiences to about a thousand hearers in "my
workshop" at Atlantic City, and it was a most responsive audience.
Already we have received a generous supply of blankets four our new
house and for Tivoli. I could tell of other works these groups have
done, but there is no space here. I only wish that the cause of peace,
the rejection of war and service in the armed forces, and refusal to pay
income tax could be part of their way of life. Jesus told us to love our
enemies and St. Francis' followers made a rejection of feudal service to
the war lords of the time part of their religious commitment.

In the early days of St. Francis, his following the teachings of Christ
did indeed mean voluntary poverty and rejection of war. However there
is, as we all know, an individual, a personal struggle going on today
among priests and nuns who are seeking "lifestyles" closer to the poor.
These struggles also are found in the charismatic movement.

There were four good sermons, down to earth and solid in doctrine,
preached by Fr. Francis McNutt, O. P., which were listened to with most
impressive attention by those 16,500 people. That same group sang the
Alleluias with a beauty and a might joy which almost rocked the dingy,
vast convention hall. It was a weekend which was a retreat for me and
those who were with me, and I was reminded often of Father John Hugo of
Pittsburgh, whose retreats aroused the same joy in our hearts years ago.

Catholic Worker Retreats
------------------------

Those were retreats a week long and in silence, in the beautiful
surroundings of Oakwood, Pa., and Catholic Workers came from all over
the country to attend them. Fr. Hugo wrote also, for the pages of the
**Catholic Worker**, those magnificent articles **The Crime of
Conscription**, and **Catholics Can be Conscientious Objectors**, and
**Weapons of The Spirit**. He saw the importance of "alternative life
styles" while we were being labeled "romantic agrarians" by opponents in
Washington at the Catholic University.

Father Hugo I would certainly term an intellectual and he appealed to
and also affronted higher-ups in Catholic intellectual circles, so he
suffered, bright sun in our lives that he was, an eclipse.

But one final point in his retreat always was, "unless the grain of
wheat fall into the ground and die it remains alone. But if it dies it
bears much fruit." Another was "Christ was obedient unto death."

And to me this "charismatic movement" (I prefer the term "Pentecostal")
is the fruit, the result of such teachings as that of Fr. J. Hugo, the
priest who has influenced my thinking, my understanding of the spiritual
life more than any other.

I did not intend to write this encomium, but it has just poured forth
from my pen as I sit here at Maryfarm, Tivoli, back home from this
joyful spiritual weekend. To praise God is to rejoice. Those final
Psalms in the Bible have that same gladness and indicate the singing of
a multitude.

The Pentecostal movement is also a return to scripture (everyone had the
New Testament and Psalms with them). It is Personalism and
Communitarianism too. Communities have been set up all over the country.
No longer will families fight a solitary struggle to survive.

How far the Pentecostals with their family communities follow the
teaching of the Popes on birth control, in these days of unemployment,
lack of housing etc., it is hard to say. But there is, together with the
hard teachings of the Church, an emphasis on faith and prayer, and the
seventy-times-seven teachings of Jesus about forgiveness which to me
marks the power of the Confessional.

(But where **is** the Confessional these days? We want a place where we
can hide our heads as we confess our mean and paltry sins.)

Back at St. Joseph's
--------------------

We are going through a busy time at the CW -- Always the Line, what
Johannah Hughes, who grew up with us, used to call the "bread-lions",
when she was a little girl.

The Line means trips to Hunts Point Market for vegetables reach week. It
means the converted United Parcel truck coming down from Tivoli farm
with more vegetables. It means cleaning vegetables at night and early
morning rising to make a soup filled also with protein -- lentils, split
peas or beans. (navy beans rose from 20 to 41 dollars a hundred pounds
this last week.) It means the whole staff taking turns cleaning, mopping
daily at St. Joseph's house and now scraping plaster and old wax off the
linoleum or tiles at Maryhouse and scrubbing there, (on their knees)
room by room. Always visitors, actually from all over the world. I have
talked with visitors from Africa, South America, Australia, England.
Long talks mean an exchange of knowledge of all the great, and thank
God, also the good changes which are taking place in this time of
travail. It is a busy time for me because I have two articles to write,
-- one for Helene Iswolsky's **Third Hour** and one for **America**.
Also two trips ahead -- one to Alderson, West Va. with Sister Margaret
Traxler for a meeting with the women prisoners at the Federal prison
there, and on to Minnesota to visit friends and to rest. Those friends
have paid for my fare three times by now, so sooner or later I must go.
I will love being there!

By these last paragraphs our readers will know I am in good health (the
Pentecostals believe in Healings, you know) and they will also excuse me
for being remiss about answering mail. Please forgive us our omissions
and pray for us.
