%Reflections During Advent
% Dorothy Day

*Ave Maria*, November-December 1966

*Summary: During the Advent of 1966 Dorothy Day wrote a four-part series
for *Ave Maria* magazine grouped under the title "Reflections During
Advent." (DDLW \#558).*

Week One: Searching for Christ

Commenting on the riches and turbulence in an era of renewal of the
Church, she decides to write about Mary in her life. Traces her early
religious experiences, tells what led her to God, and recounts the gift
of a rosary and a statue of Mary. Appreciates the physical and sensual
aspects of prayer and relates the mysteries of the rosary to life
experiences. Tells of other Marian prayers said at the Catholic Worker
and Mary's role in bringing us to Christ.

Week Two: The Meaning of Poverty

Gives examples of false voluntary poverty and refutes the notion that
real poverty doesn't exist. Challenges everyone to a personal response,
not a government one, to poverty and to ask ourselves "What shall we
do?" Gives examples and concludes that all can do something and that
whatever work of mercy we perform we "do it for love of Jesus, in His
humanity, for love of our brother, for love of our enemy." Points to the
scandal of the wealth of the Church and thanks God for the sacraments
and the Word in the Scriptures--our light and our food.

Week Three: Chastity

Paints a picture of chastity as "a positive virtue, a strength and a
power in the great world around us" through personal stories, and quotes
from literature, scripture, and spiritual writers. The marriage act is
compared to love and union with God. Speaks of chosen and unchosen
celibacy. Extols friendship, community, and the need to express
tenderness. Other keywords: sex, abortion, purity, new morality\

Week Four: Obedience

Ponders the relationship between freedom and authority, faith and
obedience. Uses her conversion and starting of the Catholic Worker as
examples of conscience and the great freedom of the laity. Cites various
authorities and the example of Pope John XXIII on freedom and obedience.
Ultimately, links obedience to love and her faith. Repeats the need to
"search the Scriptures" and to achieve a "second conversion" to the
faith.

Permission to reprint this series was obtained from Ave Maria Press,
Notre Dame, Indiana, 1-800-282-1865.
