%Reflections During Advent - Part Four, Obedience
% Dorothy Day

Ave Maria, December 17, 1966, pp. 20-23.

*Summary: Ponders the relationship between freedom and authority, faith
and obedience. Uses her conversion and starting of the Catholic Worker
as examples of conscience and the great freedom of the laity. Cites
various authorities and the example of Pope John XXIII on freedom and
obedience. Ultimately, links obedience to love and her faith. Repeats
the need to "search the Scriptures" and to achieve a "second conversion"
to the faith. (DDLW \#562).*

FREEDOM and authority. When I became a Catholic it never occurred to me
to question how much freedom I had or how much authority the Church had
to limit that freedom. I had been a Bible reader from early childhood
and had accepted it as an inspired book. There was so much I did not
understand in the universe that I was quite ready to accept the riddles
the Scriptures imposed on me. "I would think about that tomorrow," in
the words of Scarlett O'Hara. I had quite enough already to think about
today. We were supposed to obey the Commandments, and the Sermon on the
Mount brought them up to a new level.

I had reached the point where I wanted to obey. I was like the child in
the *New Yorker*c artoon (I was nearly 30 years old) who said, "Do I have
to do what I want to do today?" I was tired of following the devices and
desires of my own heart, of doing what I wanted to do, what my desires
told me I wanted to do, which always seemed to lead me astray. I felt
always on the verge of falling into one of the seven deadly sins. Not
having a parochial education, I just asked one of the *Catholic
Worker* staff what were the seven deadly sins, and she repeated quickly,
"Pride, Covetousness, Lust, Anger, Gluttony, Envy and Sloth. Much easier
to remember somehow than the twelve fruits of the Holy Spirit or the
fourteen works of mercy."

I did not have the conviction, as Bishop Fletcher of Boston has, that
the Ten Commandments could be amended as situation ethics demands. "Thou
shalt not covet--ordinarily. Thou shalt not kill--ordinarily. Thou shalt
not commit adultery--ordinarily" (as reported in the *New York Post*,
November 12).

If they were going to be amended at all, far better that they should be
fulfilled as Jesus Christ fulfilled them. "Anyone who looks to lust
after a woman has already committed adultery with her in his heart."
This sounded reasonable to me even before I was introduced to St.
Francis de Sales' most understandable phrase, "taking delectation in
temptation." There were the same debates about sex and purity in the
20s, and the same scorn for what was termed then the *demi-vierge,* the
one who played around but did not go the whole way.

Of course if God is rejected, then everything is permitted, as Ivan
Karamazov reasoned. But I do not think that young people want to throw
God out of the picture. Polls taken among them show that many are
rejecting the Church but not God whom they find in each other--to use
that beautiful phrase of the Quakers, "that which is of God in every
man." Gandhi himself said that he found God in his fellow man, and Jesus
Christ said that what we did for the least of His brothers we did for
Him. He also said that where two or three are gathered together in His
name, there He is in the midst of them. The discovery of these things
has meant a light so bright to many young people that it has blinded
them to the path which leads still further, to the incomparable riches
which are in the teachings of the Church, its traditions, its saints and
mystics.

But this article is supposed to be about obedience. Obedient to my
conscience, I became a Catholic, was conditionally baptized and said, "I
do believe," to the great and solemn and beautiful truths proposed to
me.

Then for the next five years no great problems came up of obedience. The
Church held up a tremendous ideal for the follower of Christ, and no
matter how many times one failed, fell flat on one's face, one might
say, the Church, Holy**Mother Church, was there with her sacraments of
Penance and Holy Eucharist to reassure and forgive and sustain and
nourish one.

In 1933 I met Peter Maurin, a French peasant who proposed to me the idea
of starting a paper which had the purpose of bringing the social
teachings of the Church to the man on the street.

I had been writing articles for *America,* the Jesuit weekly, for the
*Sign,* the Passionist monthly, and I had been going for spiritual
direction to Father Joseph McSorley, formerly superior of the Paulist
congregation in New York. I asked each one of these men for advice as to
whether it was necessary to ask permission before starting a venture of
this kind and both editors, Father Wilfrid Parsons and Father Harold
Purcell, as well as Father McSorley, told me in no uncertain terms, "No,
it was not necessary to ask for permission. The thing to do was to go
ahead, on one's own, and the proof of the pudding would be in the
eating, the tree would be known by its fruit, and if the work were of
God, it would continue."

I could well understand this. If Peter and I started something on our
own, we alone would be responsible for its mistakes. If it were begun
with the permission of the hierarchy, then they might be held
responsible. I was not thinking in terms of financial responsibility. I
was thinking of the positions we would take in regard to civil rights,
racial as well as social justice. Without knowing St. Augustine too well
(I had read only his *Confessions),* his dictum "Love God and do as you
will" had a familiar ring. The words breathed freedom, the freedom found
even in obedience to a temporary injustice, even to such a temporary
injustice as stopping us once we had begun. I have never felt so sure of
myself that I did not feel the necessity of being backed up by great
minds, searching the Scriptures and searching the writings of the saints
for my authorities.

Later I came across this passage from St. Francis de Sales: "My agent
says that it is wrong to apply to Rome for things in which it can be
avoided and some cardinals have said the same: for, say they, there are
things which have no need of authorization because they are lawful,
which, when authorization is asked for are examined in a different way.
And the Pope is very glad that custom should authorize many things which
he does not wish to authorize himself on account of consequences."

Bishop O'Hara of Kansas City was a good friend and visited us in the
earliest days of our work. I remember his first visit very well. We were
living on Fifteenth Street, and he sought us out there on the East Side
near Avenue A, not many blocks from where the Municipal Lodging House
for men used to be, so that they came to visit us daily for food and
clothing. He came in to the poverty of that little store front and took
the trouble before he left of going to each person who was there and
giving them a blessing. Later one of the girls who had worked in textile
mills, who had just come to us from the hospital after the birth of her
third child out of wedlock, told us most seriously, "When I kissed his
ring, it was just like a blood transfusion. It did something to me." He
kept up his friendship with us, helping us when we sent out an appeal
and writing us when there were things in the paper with which he
disagreed. But he said to Peter on one memorable visit, "Peter, you lead
the way, and we (the bishops) will follow."

Peter knew what he meant. He meant that it was up to the laity to be in
the vanguard, to live in the midst of the battle, to live in the world
which God so loved that He sent His only begotten Son to us to show us
how to live and to die, to meet that last great enemy, Death. We were to
explore the paths of what was possible, to find concordances with our
opponents, to seek for the common good, to try to work with all men of
goodwill, and to trust all men too, and to believe in that goodwill, and
to forgive our own failures and those of others seventy times seventy
times. We could venture where priest and prelate could not or ought not,
in political and economic fields. We could make mistakes without too
great harm, we could retrace our steps, start over again in this attempt
to build a new society within the shell of the old, as Peter and the old
radicals (those who went to the roots of things) used to say.

I speak of these incidents to show the tremendous freedom there is in
the Church, a freedom most cradle Catholics do not seem to know they
possess. They do know that a man is free to be a Democrat or a
Republican, but they do not know that he is also free to be a
philosophical anarchist by conviction. They do believe in free
enterprise but they do not know that cooperative ownership and communal
ownership can live side-by-side with private ownership of property. I
could bolster my positions by the writings in the Dominican monthly
*Blackfriars,*for instance; one entire issue years ago was entitled,
"Who Baptized Capitalism?" And by the words of the Bishop of Mwanza in
Tanzania, who said the world was not divided between East and West but
between the haves and the have-nots. "Only a wealthy country," he said,
"could afford the luxury of all this private ownership."

I remember a meeting I had with three Jewish students who were putting
me on a bus in St. Louis on one of my speaking trips. They said, "The
one thing the *Catholic Worker*has done for us is to open up our minds
to the immense freedom there is in the Church."

OBEDIENCE is a matter of love which makes it voluntary, not compelled by
fear or force. Pope John's motto was *Obedience and Peace,* and yet he
was the pope who flouted conventions which had hardened into laws as to
what a pope could or could not do, and the Pharisees were scandalized
and the people delighted.

All his life long he had done his work, which sometimes meant in silence
and solitude and inactivity as in Bulgaria and Turkey. But now that he
was pope and his decisions concerned the whole world, he ceased to obey
men. Father Ernesto Balducci, in his book *John--The Transitional Pope*,
calls him a man of vast and vital****ideas and said that his temperament
led him "to escape whenever possible from behind the velvet curtains of
ecclesiastical offices into the roads and squares where living men and
women move." He had accepted the frustrations of his life and his plans
because "obedience is not only a moral virtue but a specific principle
of faith, and as such, has reasons that reason cannot understand."

Pope John compared his own life during those years of frustration to the
waiting of Simeon in the Temple who seemed to be "wasting the years,
pouring out his life as a total loss. And his life was not lost at all.
The time he spent in waiting prepared him to present Christ to the
world. And now I tell you that my own poor life continues to be poured
out as you know; with my usual hair shirt which is so dear to me, on my
back." This he wrote in a letter to a friend some years before his
election to the papacy.

Immediately following his election as pope he went to visit the prison
in Rome--"You could not come to see me, so I came to see you," he told
the prisoners. Every day of his long priestly life he had prayed at the
third hour of the Office, "Let our love be set aflame by the fire of
Your love and its heat in turn enkindle love in our neighbors." God had
so answered his prayer that his own love kindled a fire which is
sweeping over the world and the whole Church is enkindled.

This may sound like an extravagant way of speaking when we know full
well the****turmoil, the controversy, the impatience in the Church today
which has led so many to leave convents and monasteries and even the
priesthood, that high estate. Men and women have begun to exercise their
freedom and are examining their own obedience, as to whether it was a
matter of fear or of habit. To examine too the kind of training they in
the home and in the school.

Someone said that Pope John had opened a window and let in great blasts
of fresh air. With all his emphasis on obedience, I do not think he has
been understood. What the American people--and I speak only of them, not
knowing the condition of the Church in other countries--now feel free to
do is to criticize, speak their minds. They have always been accused of
a lack of diplomacy, or at least of bad manners, and they have felt it a
virtue in themselves, the virtue of honesty, truthfulness. Freedom has
meant searching and questioning. What do we really believe? It is as
though man were realizing for the first time what is involved in this
profession of Christianity. It is as though we were going through the
Creed slowly, and saying to ourselves, Do I believe this, and this, and
this?

When we had retreats at the Catholic Worker farm we used to renew our
baptismal vows at the close of the retreat, and I remember one fellow
saying, "I want to read them over carefully to see if I wish to renew
them." He meant to be humorous, because of course he knew that the vows
had been made, and this recognition brought up the question of infant
Baptism. The rite had been performed, the sacrament conferred, we were
really in for it! We are free to obey or disobey.

Faith is required when we speak of obedience. Faith in a God who created
us, a God who is Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Faith in a God to whom we
owe obedience for the very reason that we have been endowed with freedom
to obey or disobey. Love, Beauty, Truth, all the attributes of God which
we see reflected about us in creatures, in the very works of man himself
whether it is bridges or symphonies wrought by his hands, fill our
hearts with such wonder and gratitude that we cannot help but obey and
worship.

The knowledge of Scripture is knowledge of Christ and His teaching. One
time Jacques Maritain spoke to us in a little dingy church hall in the
Italian section of New York, a hall which was dirty and cold and
smelling of beer from a party the night before. (Smokey Joe, so called
from the "smoke" he had consumed in his long life before he settled down
at the *Catholic Worker,* had refused the pastor's appeal for volunteers
to paint the hall, judging the pastor guilty of contributing to the
delinquency of his parishioners. Jacques Maritain, who loves the poor,
spoke simply of the love of God and especially of the need to study the
Scriptures in order to find Christ, Him whom our soul loves. "Read the
Gospel prayerfully," he said, "**searching for the truth**,not just
to find something with which to back up your own arguments," he added
with humor.

I thought, as he spoke, of St. Therese who wore pressed against her
heart, under her habit, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as one would a love
letter. I think too of Dostoievsky's Raskolnikov in *Crime and
Punishment,* and the little Testament given him on his way to Siberia,
which brought him his knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of
his sins.

Lord, I believe, help Thou my unbelief. My faith may be the size of a
mustard seed but even so, even aside from its potential, it brings with
it a beginning of love, an inkling of love, so intense that human love
with all its heights and depths pales in comparison.

Even seeing through a glass darkly makes one want to obey, to do all the
Beloved wishes, to follow Him to Siberia, to Antarctic wastes, to the
desert, to prison, to give up one's life for one's brothers since He
said, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brothers ye have done it unto me."

But how much easier it is to obey the least ones, than the great ones of
the earth, whether they are princes of the church or state.

It has seemed to me always that one of the proofs of that great
catastrophe, the Fall, is man's almost instinctive desire to disobey, on
the human level, on the natural level. It can be observed from earliest
youth.

When I was raising my own small daughter and at the same time took care
of the children of two Village women one summer at the beach, one of the
women used to lecture me on not interfering with the freedom of her
child. "Never say 'No' to him," she would tell me. "You must say,
'Wouldn't you rather do this, or that? 'Offer him an alternative. When
you say no, it just puts his back up."

The fairy tales we read to children are full of this matter of obedience
and disobedience, and the fearful consequences of disobedience--the
story of Bluebeard, the story of Pandora's box, and so on. On the other
hand, obedience, blind obedience, is always rewarded. I was just
reminded of the little girl who obligingly went out to pick strawberries
in January, and as she swept off the steps at the command of a little
dwarf, there she found the strawberries she had been bidden to pick.
This reminds me of St. Teresa's emphasis on obedience even to the
unquestioning planting of a picked cucumber, or St. Ignatius' command to
plant a cabbage upside down. This example was given last month during
the press discussion of the rebuke to the Jesuits by Pope Paul, who
seemed to think they were straying from obedience to papal directives to
which they were sworn.

Such obedience never has surprised me, convert that I am. I felt it was
part of love, of loyalty, of abandonment, part indeed of that folly of
the Cross so emphasized by St. Paul.

Obedience, I thought, meant an ordered universe and was proper response
to authority. It meant people working together for the common good. A
man had authority when he knew what he was doing, whether performing an
operation, filling a tooth, directing a symphony. If a man was an
authority in his field, it meant obeying his directions whether, as
around the Catholic Worker, it meant Hans in the kitchen, Mike in the
engineering line, John in the fields or Martin Corbin in the editor's
chair. In the House of Hospitality in the city, it meant whoever was "in
charge," who would take the responsibility of doing the job, getting the
tobacco, shopping for the groceries, giving out the flop money or
carfares or emergency gifts or loans, getting the speakers for Friday
night meetings. Authority was certainly decentralized and many shared in
it.

Philosophical anarchism, decentralism, required that we follow the
Gospel precept to be obedient to every living thing: "Be subject
therefore to every human creature for God's sake." It meant washing the
feet of others, as Jesus did at the Last' Supper. "You call me Master
and Lord," He said, "and rightly so, for that is what I am. Then if I,
your Lord, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another's
feet. I have set you an example; you are to do as I have done for you."
To serve others, not to seek power over them. Not to dominate, not to
judge others.

Simone Weil has a great deal to say about obedience. "The idea of the
despised and humiliated hero which was so common among the Greeks and is
the actual theme of the Gospels," she writes, "is almost outside our
Western tradition which has remained on the Roman road of militarism,
centralization, bureaucracy and totalitarianism.

"Every new development for the last three centuries has brought men
closer to the state of affairs in which absolutely nothing would be
recognized in the whole world as possessing a claim to obedience except
the authority of the State."

How strong and positive a virtue is this obedience to God and to one's
conscience! St. Peter said, speaking for himself and the Apostles: "We
must obey God rather than men."

Certainly the staff of editors and all the volunteers who are so at home
with us that they call themselves Catholic Workers must have tried the
patient endurance of the chancery office in New York, not only because
of our frequent sojourns in jail and because of the controversial nature
of the issues taken up in the paper and by our actions, but also because
of the false ideas put forward by many of our friends as being our
positions.

One time I made the statement, whether in writing or in a speech I do
not remember, that I was so grateful for the freedom we had in the
Church that I was quite ready to obey with cheerfulness if Cardinal
Spellman ever told us to lay down our pens and stop publication. Perhaps
I had no right to speak for more rebellious souls than mine. Or for
those whose consciences dictated continuance in a struggle, even with
the highest authority, the Church itself. Perhaps I have sounded too
possessive about the *Catholic Worker* itself and had no right to speak
for the publication, but only for myself. I do know that Peter Maurin
would have agreed with me. Most cradle Catholics have gone through, or
need to go through, a second conversion which binds them with a more
profound, a more mature love and obedience to the Church.

I do know that my nature is such that gratitude alone, gratitude for the
faith, that most splendid gift, a gift not earned by me, a gratuitous
gift, is enough to bind me in holy obedience to Holy Mother Church and
her commands.

I consider the loss of faith the greatest of disasters and the greatest
unhappiness. How can one help grieving over friends and relatives and
how insistent should be our prayers? We should be importunate as the
friend trying to borrow some bread to feed his late guests, as the
importunate widow before the unjust judge. But obedience to the command
"Search the Scriptures" will give us the reassurance we need. Will a
father, when he is asked for bread, give his son a stone?

Of course, it does not necessarily follow that one "out of the Church"
has lost his faith. His rebellion may be the first step in examining his
belief, and may lead to his first valid act of faith. C. S. Lewis has
said something like this, but I do not know where, though it comforts me
to believe it.

But for me, faith and Church, and obedience to the Church, are tied
together; and my gratitude for this sureness in my heart is such that I
can only say, I believe, help Thou my unbelief. I believe and I obey.

(Permission to reprint this article was obtained from Ave Maria Press,
Notre Dame, Indiana, 1-800-282-1865)
