% On Simple Prayer
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March-April 1976, 2, 4.

*Summary: Praises the simplicity of Bro. Lawrence's way of practicing
the presence of God, comparing it to St. Therese's "little way." Sees
faith coming through the senses. Calls for an increase in the desire for
God in our troubled times. (DDLW \#568).*

(This article is taken from Dorothy's introduction to the Templegate
edition of **THE PRACTICE OF THE PRESENCE OF GOD**, by Brother Lawrence
of the Resurrection, Templegate Publishers, Springfield, Ill., 1974. The
book is edited and translated by Donald Attwater: 127 pages,
\$5.95--Eds. Note.)

This book, made up of a few conversations, a few letters, has come down
to us through the centuries, and is too little known. It is a classic,
and carries a message, points a way. It tells of a spirituality which is
within the reach of all. Most men and women have to work for a living. A
philosopher once said "Do what you are doing"--that is, pay attention to
what you are doing. Brother Lawrence obviously had no books in his
kitchen, to study ways of finding God. He had to find his way, obviously
by prayer.

But how to pray? St. Teresa of Avila wrote many books on prayer, St.
John of the Cross too, and books have been written about their books,
further expounding the meaning of prayer. St. Paul told us all to search
the scripture and to pray without ceasing. Both commands must have
presented difficulties to Brother Lawrence, who spent his life in a
kitchen or in the market place finding the bread and wine, meat and
vegetables for a community. Certainly there was little time for the
delightful occupation of **reading** about prayer.

I am sure the disciples of Jesus did little reading, fishermen as they
were, many of them. They asked him, "How shall we pray?" He gave them
the Lord's prayer. He, God-man that he was, told them no other prayer...

Entire books have been written about the Lord's Prayer but there is no
mention of books in Brother Lawrence's reported conversations and
letters. His serenity, his simplicity is that of the Prayer. He, God-man
that he was, told you shall receive. "Seek and you shall find." Jesus
taught us what to ask for and, as Pascal commented, "You would not seek
Him, if you had not already found Him."

Faith and the Senses
--------------------

Brother Lawrence's times were no different from ours. St. Teresa of
Avila, who lived in the time of the Inquisition, wrote, "All times are
dangerous times." Just as St. Paul called upon us to be other Christs,
Lawrence was another Christ, who lived in the presence of the Father at
all times.

He grew up like other children and young men, and went through a
conversion of heart at the age of sixteen. He had one of those striking
experiences that I think we all have, whether we live in the country or
in the city. "One winter day he noticed a tree stripped of its leaves
and reflected that before long leaves would appear anew, then flowers
and then the fruit, and that this consideration gave him so striking an
idea of the Providence and might of God that it had never since been
effaced from his soul;...and kindled in him so great a love for God that
he was not able to say if it had at all increased during the forty-odd
years which had since passed."

We have to leap into faith through the senses--from the natural to the
supernatural--and I was drawn to the Church in my youth because it
appealed to the senses. The music speaking to the ear, the incense to
the sense of smell, the appeal of color to the eye, stained glass, ikons
and statues, the bread and wine to the taste, the touch of rich
vestments and altar linens, the touch of holy water, oils, the sign of
the cross, the beating of the breast.

When my own mother was dying, she asked me quietly and soberly, "What
about a future life?" I could only point to the flowers which surrounded
her. It was in the fall and there were giant chrysanthemums filling the
tables in her room. It was like a promise from God, and God keeps his
promises. I pointed to the trees outside, stripped of their leaves,
looking dead to the eye from that distance, but there had recently been
a blaze of glory in the color of the maples. Another sign of a promise.
Later she said, "I can only pray the Our Father and the Creed. Is that
enough?" And when I thought of the books which would fill libraries
which had been written on every phrase contained in the Our Father, it
comforted my heart to know that she was practicing the presence of God
this way.

**The Practice of the Presence of God** consists of conversations,
letters, and maxims on how we should live, with the idea of cultivating
this sense of the presence of God in the soul, and indeed in the world
about us.

The very word "sense" might seem to throw us off, because the whole book
has to do with the spiritual life of man, not his sense life, and so can
be brushed aside as non-sense. But we all have a desire for the True,
the Good and the Beautiful which is God. And we look around us today in
a time of war and fear, of stockpiling for war, of greed, dishonesty,
and ambition, and long for peace in our time, for that peace which
passeth understanding, which we see only glimpses of, through a glass
darkly.

(I cannot write and express myself without using the words and phrases
of St. Paul, of scripture. We are told to "search the scripture" to find
comfort and guidance. St. Therese of Lisieux who reminds me of Brother
Lawrence in her practice of the "little way," said once that she could
read fifty chapters of Isaiah and get nothing out of them and then
suddenly the fifty-first flooded her soul with light. Which makes me
think of the subconscious mind working away, and leaping on what it
needs for sustenance, comfort, or understanding.)

When St. Paul says to pray always, to pray without ceasing, he is also
talking about practicing the presence of God.

Return to Simplicity
--------------------

A few years ago an old woman died in our midst, here at our House of
Hospitality in New York. She was surrounded by many men and women she
had known a long time; she had the best of care. We had a nurse living
with us who could meet any emergency. But Catherine, the last few weeks
of her life, often clutched at my hand as I passed her, and would plead
with me, "There is a God, tell me there is a God! Tell me!"

I could only say, "Yes, Catherine, there is a God. He is our Father and
He loves us, you and me." When you say these things it is an act of
faith. You feel your helplessness so you pray harder. You seem to know
nothing, you can only hold her hand and make your affirmation. So much
of our prayer is made up of these affirmations. "I praise Thee, O God, I
bless Thee. What have I on earth but Thee and what do I desire in heaven
besides Thee? I am saying this **for** Catherine, **instead** of
Catherine, because she is in "the valley of the shadow.'"

But did I comfort her? A few days later a young girl said to me, "The
word **Father** means nothing to me. It brings me no comfort. I had a
drunken father who abused my mother and beat his children." We can do
nothing by our words. So we are driven to prayer by our helplessness.
God takes over---

Living today in a time of war, crying out Peace, Peace when there is no
Peace, fearing age and death, pain and darkness, destitution and
loneliness, people need to get back to the simplicity of Brother
Lawrence...

Brother Lawrence did not have the tumultuous life of St. Teresa and St.
John of the Cross (who lived in the century before him, in danger of the
Inquisition, the latter imprisoned and beaten by his fellow monks,
factions growing up in the church around them). Perhaps it was because
he did not write, was not published. Yet, writes Attwater, "He was known
and venerated by the whole of Paris. And not only by the crowd of
nameless and poor Christians who, in all ages and places, have had such
a genius for detecting sanctity, but also by the learned, the
distinguished, and the noble, both clerical and lay."

Our Real Desire
---------------

We need this book today when we are overwhelmed by the vastness of
today's problems. We need to return to the simplicity of a Brother
Lawrence, whose "little way" makes our burdens light and rejoices the
heart.

These days I can never look up at the sky and see the moon without
thinking with wonder and awe that men have walked there. To conceive of
such a thing--to desire such an adventure, to be capable of overcoming
all fear, all doubt, to have faith in man's ability to solve problems,
and seek out the way to go about this great exploration--what dedication
of mind and will! "What is man that thou are mindful of him? Thou hast
made him little less than the angels." It keeps coming into my mind--how
much man would be capable of if his soul were strong in the love of God,
if he wanted God as much as he wanted to penetrate the power and glory
of God's creation.

To know Him, to love Him and to serve Him--a personal God, who took on
human flesh and became man and suffered and died for us. To find the
way, not to the moon but to God--this is man's real desire, because of
his need for love, and God is love.

Brother Lawrence, who worked the last 30 years of his life in the
kitchen of a Carmelite monastery and died at the age of 80 found Him in
"The Practice of the Presence of God."
