% On Pilgrimage - March/April 1977
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March-April 1977, 2, 8.

*Summary: While housebound at Tamar's place in Vermont she reflects on
the effect Solzehenitsyn's writing on her faith and reminisces about a
Russian friend from her youth who recently died. (DDLW \#577).*

Has the snow and ice melted from the hills of Vermont, where I spent the
first week of March, to celebrate my daughter's birthday? Only Nicky and
Hilaire were at home, and Maggie Corbin, who was taking care of the
sheep and goats in the absence of Martha, who is picking oranges in
Florida. Hilaire, a recent graduate of Dick Bliss' East Hill school in
Andover, took advantage of a ride to New York for two days to visit
Maryhouse, to see "Fiddler on the Roof," and visit the Museum of the
American Indian.

There was plenty of wood cut to stoke the fires. (They have not burnt
oil all winter.) The kitchen and living room and work room were all
comfortably warm. I slept in the work room with its three sunny windows.
Outside, there was the wintry beauty of trees etched against the white
snow and sunsets were golden. Inside, Tamar's loom and spinning wheels
and all her specimens of spinning, dyeing and weaving were familiar and
beautiful. When she was a child on the beach at Staten Island, her wall
hangings were large horseshoe crabs, and sinister-looking spider crabs,
and shells of all descriptions. I loved especially the strings of
cocoon-shaped sacks found on the beach full of infinitesimal whelks.
They look like a broken necklace, in a way.

It was hard not be be able to get out, not to be able to walk down the
road to Becky's and John's house. Becky and her two children, Lara and
Justin, were over often and I saw Eric and his son Shawn, and Mary and
her son Forest. Tamar has nine children and twelve grandchildren.

There is a steep driveway up to the house and the sure-footed young
people could navigate the frozen, icy road, but I was afraid to venture
forth. The memory of several old women in our New York house of
hospitality, who had broken their hips from falling on icy streets, kept
me house-bound.

Solzhenitsyn
------------

I will have to go again later this spring if only to drive to Cavendish,
a pilgrimage to pay silent tribute to one of the greatest writers of our
day -- Alexander Solzhenitsyn.

Cavendish is not far from Perkinsville, the one-store, one Protestant
church, one gas-station-town which is Tamar's post office address. (The
nearest Catholic Church is in Springfield, miles away, along a winding
highway, skirting the Black River.) It is a factory town--small too, and
textile. There is an old "shoddy" factory there, which long ago
recruited Russian and Polish people to the town. One Russian in his
homesickness planted a few acres of beautiful white birch in the midst
of which he built his hut--his first dwelling. "Shoddy" is a fabric,
according to Webster, made of reclaimed wool, obtained by pulling apart
old worsteds or woolens. Another definition given to "shoddy" is "an
inferior person or thing claiming superiority." Whoever it was who
planted those acres of white birch was no shoddy person, to use the
other meaning of the word. He was an exile like Solzhenitsyn from a
country whose beauty haunted him.

From the time I read **One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich** I have
been fascinated by this author, who, to my mind, stands with Chekhov,
Tolstoi and Dostoievsky.

I read the book and later saw the movie--or did I actually see the
movie? The book itself made so vivid an impression on me, I'm not sure
about a movie version. It was that Christian consciousness of sharing in
the sufferings of Christ, that appreciation of **The Word** that so
impressed me that I could only conceive of Ivan Denisovich as the
happiest man in the prison camps. I had a morbid fear of reading **The
Cancer Ward**, but "Ivan" dispelled it. I found the same sense of the
nobility of man capable of enduring, even transcending, all that might
befall him, that won me--the conviction that no matter what happened,
"underneath was the everlasting arms." One could never succumb to
despair with such a conviction.

"The worst has already happened and been repaired." That line intrudes
itself in my mind here. It is somewhere in the Revelations of Juliana of
Norwich, and refers to Adam's Fall and Jesus' reparation of that "worst
tragedy," man's failure to respect God's greatest gift, his freedom.

There has been so much in the local press about Solzhenitsyn, Tamar told
me. I made her promise me that she, or Martha or Maggie or Becky, would
clip out whatever else appeared about him in the local press.

"He built a riot fence and barbed wire around his property," they told
me, "and then he went to the Town meeting and apologized for doing it.
But he is afraid of something happening to his wife and to his
children."

Remembering how Trotsky had been followed to Mexico and assassinated, I
did not wonder at his fear for them.

And in view of what happened this month in Washington, D.C., just after
my return from Vermont--the occupation of the B'nai B'rith and Moslem
headquarters, the holding of hostages--and the recent assassination of
the Chilean exile, Orlando Letelier, the violence of our time here in
the United States is horrifying.

Recalling the little Russian classic, **The Way of a Pilgrim**, I
resolve to begin again an attempt to "pray without ceasing."

Russian Friends
---------------

When I returned from Vermont to New York I learned of the death of a
Russian friend of my youth, Varya Bulgakov, who had been trained as an
actress in Russia. When I knew her she was playing in the Eva le
Gallienne Theatre on Fourteenth Street, a stock company which put on
**The Three Sisters** of Chekhov, also a dramatized version of
Dostoievsky's **Brothers Karamozov**, and, strangely enough, a
dramatization of Dickens' **Cricket on the Hearth**.

Varya was a friend of my beach friends -- the Maruchess family of whom I
wrote in my book **The Long Loneliness**. Varya's husband had a part in
"Street-Scene" which was running on Broadway. They had a son, Shura, who
telephoned last week to my brother John about her death. Shura and John
were fishing companions 14 or 15 years old at the time, and when John
stayed with me summers, they swam and fished and bobbed for eels in
Raritan Bay. Varya Bulgakov herself played winters in Eva Le Gallienne's
company and I coached her for her part in **Cricket on The Hearth**, and
helped her along her English by reading Voltaire's **Candide** with her,
which I myself happened to be reading at the time and which I much
preferred to the **Cricket**.

There seemed to be a host of Russians and Russian Jews visiting my
friends at the time -- many of them singers. One was Salama, whose first
name I never knew, but he had an immense voice and came with zakouska
and vodka one night at 15th Street, the first year of the Catholic
Worker's existence when we were having one of Peter Maurin's, at that
time, nightly meetings for the "clarification of thought." (It was
Peter's first point is his program of action.) But there could be no
clarification of thought while Salama was around. Except perhaps Peter,
who got his idea from him of **chanting** his **Easy Essays** from a
soapbox in Columbus Circle. It was Peter who declaimed line by line, "To
give and not to take," and two or three of our C.W. staff were supposed
to reply -- "this is what makes men human, etc."

When Varya Bulgakov played in **The Three Sisters**, she wore what we
ever after called a Masha dress. It was black and somber, as I remember
it, and my sister and a few other friends had also what they called a
Masha dress. It was supposed to be for somber moods but it always lifted
my spirits.

And now she has gone and we will remember her in our prayers. The
services were held at St. Seraphim's Church.

The Eva Le Gallienne Theatre on 14th Street is no longer there and this
goodly company of friends have also "passed on." (I like the term. I
like the term "transport" better.) They have been transported beyond
this world. let us hope that death is indeed a transport of joy, and
Varya has joined those she loved in the Purgatory which Baron von Hugel
and St. Angela of Foligno call the happiest place to be next to Heaven.

So I pray the Lord that the soul of Varya Bulgakov, through the mercy of
God, rests in Peace.

P.S. Once I asked Varya how she could project her voice so that she
could be heard in the last rows of the theatre. She replied that if,
when you came on the stage, you would face with your mind's eye that
last row and the balcony, and under the balcony--and mentally "make your
intention" to be heard--you would indeed be heard often. If I answered a
question from the third row of seats, I would only be heard as far as
the third row.

Thank you, Verya Bulgakov, for those hours we had reading together, and
sharing suffering together.
