% On Pilgrimage - January 1979
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1979, 2, 7.

*Summary: Jottings about music, books, visitors, and liturgies. (DDLW
\#595).*

Jobs to do: Clear the desk of old mail, and clear out books in my room
-- they are two deep on some shelves. I have eleven shelves cluttered
with them!

\* \* \*

A concert on radio -- Richard Strauss' **Salome**. I heard it at the old
Metropolitan Opera House years ago -- it was considered decadent music
then. The Johnsons, a couple who lived at the Catholic Worker and later
had charge of our first farming community, were scandalized at my going
to hear it.

\* \* \*

Julia (Smith) Moore died in the night at St. Vincent's Hospital. She had
received the last rites. I wasn't told until the morning. Julia said to
me once, "I have enjoyed every day of my life." Poor dear, she had also
been a panhandler, par excellence, for years. Jane Sammon came up to sit
with me, knowing how long Julia had been with us. Jane is a most tender
and sympathetic (the word means "suffering with others") person, and has
proved it by her feeling for Tina de Aragon, since they met as patients
in the hospital. Tina is my sister-in-law's sister.

\* \* \*

Dr. Marion Moses had supper with me, and checked my heart, lungs, etc.
Marion is specializing in environmental medicine, fighting against
poisonous sprays used both in peace and war. She has worked with Cesar
Chavez on the West Coast.

\* \* \*

There are hints of renewal of Selective Service again.

\* \* \*

Went to 5:30 p.m. Mass at our parish church -- the singing was weak, as
it also is at Vespers in our house. No strong voices like our
Puerto-Rican fellow-parishioners. It is a joy to go to the 10:15 a.m.
Mass on Sunday and hear them sing.

Received a box of delicacies from Patrick O'Connor for Christmas --
mostly cheeses. He was the editor of Curtis Books, which published my
books. And some reader sent Stanley Vishnewski some cheese from
Gethsemani Abbey for the house.

\* \* \*

Gary Donatelli is home from his pilgrimage to Rome (and to visit his
relatives in Italy). Reading over my old diaries, to enjoy again one of
my own pilgrimages to Rome in the past, I recall, too, past crises we
have lived through.

Joan Welch visited -- we talked of the sadness of the farm closing at
Tivoli. We have such an attractive (physically and mentally) crowd here
now in the First and Third Street houses, that everyone wants to be
here. More stimulus in the city.

But it is good to have Deane Mowrer here. What a valiant person she is.

\* \* \*

I am still reading Fr. Geoffrey Gneuhs' manuscript on Peter Maurin. It
is so good to keep Peter's seemingly simple "Easy Essays" in mind -- his
repetitions -- his sense of being a teacher -- his idea of the
troubadors, chanting the "Easy Essays" at Columbus Circle, with Marge
Hughes, a joyful follower and cooperator, responding to Peter's "To give
and not to take" with "That is what makes man human." Many tragedies in
her life, but a steadfast cooperator to this day, Marge is now working
with a group in West Virginia. A rare person, who knows "the duty of
delight," to use that phrase of Ruskin's which I love.

\* \* \*

I am also reading a "Boney" book (Australian mystery story) about a
half-aborigine detective named Napoleon Bonaparte. One learns much about
that vast country from these books. I have a series of them in the
bureau drawer. Also the "Rabbi" books. It is a little "escape" library,
which fellow-workers make use of.

\* \* \*

The Friday night meeting before Christmas, Carmen Mathews read Dickens
**A Christmas Carol** for us -- much to the delight of all.

Children came from the Nativity Church with Sister Eileen to sing
Christmas carols for Maryhouse. They all sat in front of our Christmas
tree in the dining room.

Our Midnight Mass on Christmas Eve was in the auditorium at Maryhouse --
very crowded, people from both houses, and many others -- Kiernan Dugan,
Jacques Travers, Mary and Kevin Pope, etc. -- with us.

On Christmas Day, Kassie Temple and Mike Harank (he dressed as Santa,
with a huge pillow for a belly) went around the house, giving presents.
Mine -- Thomas a Kempis' **Imitation of Christ** -- a lovely little
book, long a favorite with me. Kassie, who often brings me morning
coffee, also brought up one of the **Anne of Green Gables** series.

\* \* \*

I must get Stanley, "our bookfinder," to search for **The Arundel
Motto**.

Listening to Sergei Prokofiev's Piano Concerto \#3 being played on the
radio. I met him at the Loeb's house in Chicago many years ago.

\* \* \*

I have been watching **Mourning Becomes Electra**, by Eugene O'Neill, on
television, and today I listened to the opera **Electra** on the radio.

Feast of the Holy Innocents -- we must pray for the Berrigans and all
those at the Pentagon demonstrations.

Jeanette Noel, from Hubbardston, Mass., whose house burnt down, is
coming to stay with us. She will live at St. Joseph House, but I hope we
will see much of her at Maryhouse, too.

\* \* \*

Last night (New Year's Eve) there was some noise, but not like Mott
Street years ago. A quiet day, today. I am reading Gaskel's **Charlotte
Bronte**. We had Mass tonight in our chapel. Eileen Egan and her brother
were there, Stanley too. We all ate in the dining room.

\* \* \*

My daughter Tamara arrived, unexpectedly, in time for supper. She is so
used to the cold of Vermont. She brought a tiny terrarium she made in a
glass Christmas tree ornament.

Father Lyle Young brings me the **New Yorker** magazine every Wednesday,
when he comes, as he does faithfully rain or snow, to offer mass.

\* \* \*

Stanley Vishnewski gave his slide show on the history of the Catholic
Worker for our Friday night meeting, January 5th. I went to the
auditorium to see it. In spite of the snow, there was a good crowd.

\* \* \*

I must get out and **walk** more. My resolution for the new year â€¦ but
now there is a new snowfall, and walking is hazardous.

\* \* \*

Dostoievsky wrote a story called **The Honest Thief**, about a man who
had only a "corner" of a room. I asked Wally and Rose Carmen, who went
to Russia not long after the revolution, as many, young enthusiasts did,
if people actually lived in "corners." The Carmens said they certainly
did on their first visit, sharing with Claude McKay and Langston Hughes.

(Right now, due to inclement weather, Stanley is "living" in one corner,
Tamar in another, and I am in a third!")
