% On Pilgrimage - February 1979
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1979, 7, 8.

*Summary: Snippets about her thoughts upon rising--from Scripture, Peter
Maurin, dreams--and visitors during the month. (DDLW \#596).*

Woke up this morning with these lines haunting me: "Joyous, I lay waste
the day." "Let all those that seek Thee be glad in Thee, and let such as
love Thy salvation, say always, the Lord be praised." (From Wadell's
**Desert Fathers**.)

This afternoon, I listened to **Tosca** on the radio.

\* \* \*

Katy, my granddaughter, telephoned Tamar and me from San Francisco. She
had visited Ysaye Yamamoto just outside Los Angeles. "Si," who had been
in a relocation camp during World War II, came to us when she got out,
and married Tony de Soto, whom she met at the Catholic Worker farm in
Pleasant Plains, Staten Island. A good and happy marriage.

\* \* \*

Watched Eugene O'Neill's play **Beyond the Horizon**, on television.

\* \* \*

Dr. Marion Moses had supper with me, and checked my heart, lungs, etc.
Marion is specializing in environmental medicine, fighting against
poisonous sprays used both in peace and war. She has worked with Cesar
Chavez on the West Coast.

\* \* \*

There are hints of renewal of Selective Service again.

\* \* \*

Sad news of my great-grandson, little Justin Haughton's death (struck by
a car) in Vermont. I, too, feel prostrated. Grief is numbing.

Stanley brought me a hard cover copy of **Dr. Zhivago**. Becky
Haughton's Lara (my first great grandchild and little Justin's sister)
was named after Becky and I had seen the movie, which was a great one,
with a haunting musical accompaniment.

\* \* \*

My brother John came for a visit and brought me **The Cathedral** by
Huysmans, whose book **En Retour** had started my conversion, in New
Orleans in 1928.

\* \* \*

Awoke this a.m., half-remembering a dream in which someone said, "our
country is the best country in the world." I wonder if it was the
influence of Tom Cornell's recent account, when he visited me, of his
trip to Nicaragua. He had just been there and returned (see article in
this issue). Or our faithful Ed Forand's influence. He is an ex-Marine,
who served in Panama. Or Smokey Joe, who had landed there with the
Marines at the time I was working for a Communist Party affiliate, which
was sending medical supplies to Nicaragua. My conflicting emotions!

\* \* \*

Beautiful cards are sent in with donations. One came from an Eskimo
Cooperative in Canada. I have been keeping the card as a book mark in my
Bible. "The world will be saved by beauty," as Dostoievsky wrote.

\* \* \*

Woke to the echo of Peter Maurin's words, "strikes don't strike me." He
was not in favor of labor conflict – class war. His program was
round-table discussions for clarification of thought, houses of
hospitality, and farming communes. It is wonderful to have reprints of
his **Easy Essays**, and constant repetition to make them familiar,
"help incarnate these ideas."

Peter was very disappointed, at first, that we did not print **only his
essays**. He commented, "everyone's paper is no-one's paper," and "Man
proposes, but woman disposes." But he diligently sought speakers, whom
he had at **nightly** meetings for clarification of thought, and he did
not hesitate to invite Columbia College professors, such as Carleton
Hayes, and Wall Street men, such as Mr. Woodlock of the **Wall Street
Journal**, and John Moody of the Moody Investment Service, to speak to
us at these nightly meetings, which packed our storefront headquarters.
Peter certainly got at the **roots** of our acquisitive society. But we
are so busy with the corporal works of mercy that we often neglect the
spiritual ones. Maybe people here, who are deeply interested in Peter's
ideas, will get us back to Peter's fundamental concepts.

\* \* \*

Psalm 49, v.3: "They shall give thanks unto Thy Name, which is great,
holy, wonderful." The invocation of the Name – the Jesus Prayer – J. D.
Salinger's story **Franny and Zooey**, a little masterpiece which
started many young ones praying. The Holy Name – "Hallowed be Thy Name."

\* \* \*

Eleven of our young men volunteers are now working at St. Rose's Home
for incurable cancer patients. The nuns take care of the women patients.
I was reading the life of Rose Hawthorne (Mother Alphonsa) when I first
met Peter Maurin. She was the foundress, and started the work in her own
apartment.

Stanley Vishnewski showed me his slides, in my room. He has a pictorial
history of the Catholic Worker. Stanley, at age 16, back in 1933, and
Dolan and Egan were the first to "join up" with Peter and me. Dolan and
Egan came to my door each day, for a dollar for a "flop" and a meal.

\* \* \*

We had hard, baked potatoes for supper, and cabbage overspiced. I'm in
favor of becoming a vegetarian only if the vegetables are cooked right.
(What a hard job cooking is here! But the human warmth in the dining
room covers up a multitude of sins.) Stanley is still a "growing boy" –
he can hardly eat anything.

Another food grievance – onions chopped up in a fruit salad, plus spices
and herbs! A sacrilege – to treat foods in this way. Food should be
treated with respect, since Our Lord left Himself to us in the guise of
food. His disciples knew Him in the breaking of the bread.

Fritz Eichenberg came tonight, through the bitter cold, from peace Dale
[sic], Rhode Island, to give us his talk and slide show at our Friday
night meeting. He brought me a beautiful book of ikons, and a tiny book
of animal proverbs, "wisdom of the beasts."

\* \* \*

Psalm 100: "O be joyful in the Lord." When Kassie or Marj bring in my
morning coffee, I can say the above verses. My grandfather, who fought
in the Civil War, used to have a glass of wine or whiskey at night,
which he called his "O-be-joyful."

\* \* \*

Watched Gene O'Neill's **Ah, Wilderness** on television – his one happy
play.

\* \* \*

We will have Mass in the chapel tonight at 7:30, if Father Lyle Young
can get through the flooding rain storm.

(He did get through.)

\* \* \*

Marj Humphrey and Jane Sammon are in Mexico for the Bishop's Conference
at Puebla. (We received a first report of their pilgrimage this
morning.)

\*\*\*

Peggy Scherer spoke at the Friday night meeting and showed slides of her
trip to Mexico and Guatemala.

Jean Walsh called from New Jersey about a possible house for us in
Tottenville, State Island. So many are concerned about our move from
Tivoli.

My **memory** is so bad – old age is certainly trying. Friends are too
solicitous for my health.

\*\*\*

Movies on television are a great temptation, but also a good distraction
in time of sorrow. Tamar and I watched "The African Queen," with
Katharine Hepburn and Humphrey Bogart. Unbelievable, but interesting.
Tamar enjoyed it.

\*\*\*

There was a mini-earthquake in Brooklyn, Staten Island and New Jersey –
I'm waiting for Frank to bring in **The New York Times**, so I can read
about it. Why was not Manhattan Island affected? What a thought!
Unimaginable to think of those two, fantastic World Trade towers swaying
with a sudden jarring of what we have come to think of as solid earth
beneath our feet.

Yet, I sat one day in a rocking chair, fifty years ago, nursing my tiny
daughter in front of a large mirror which hung on the wall in my beach
bungalow in Staten Island, and suddenly saw the mirror begin to quiver,
as though a train or truck (neither of which could have been within
miles of us) had suddenly passed the little house, making it tremble.

\*\*\*

Elie Wiesel spoke on the radio about the holocaust and **no-one crying
out**. But **The Catholic Worker**, and **Commonweal**, and Doctors
Chapman and Pollock – both, I believe, graduates of the Institute of
Medieval Studies at Toronto (much esteemed as a center of learning by
Peter Maurin) – all protested – Bill Gauchat, head of the Cleveland
Catholic Worker group, too.

\*\*\*

David Spier, my nephew, and Ben and Tony, two of his three sons, visited
today.

\*\*\*

One of my birthday presents last November was a subscription to the
**National Geographic** magazine. I love it, not only for its texts (I
can still be "on pilgrimage" while reading it) but also its pictures and
maps.

\*\*\*

I woke up this morning with a tune running through my head – "He has the
whole world in His Hands. He has the whole, wide world in His Hands."
So, why worry? Why lament? "Rejoice," the psalmist writes, "and again I
say, rejoice."
