% On Pilgrimage - September 1979
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1979, 4.

*Summary: A set of short entries from her diary, including descriptions
of anti-nuclear demonstrations and the subsequent arrests of
participants, the death of several friends, politics on Cuba, and a book
on Catholic Worker conscientious objectors in World War II. Mentions
many friends and books. (DDLW \#600).*

**Notes in my diary**

**7/26** Joe Zarrella visited this morning and gave me a snapshot of his
daughters and their spouses and children--a lovely color picture. Joe
and Gerry Griffin were close friends at Mott Street. Gerry wept when Joe
left the Catholic Worker, married and moved to Tell City, Indiana. Gerry
himself married and is teaching at New York University. He drove an
ambulance in the American Field Service in North Africa in the Second
World War. He used to end his letters to us "Mashed potatoes and Gravy,"
repeated hungrily five times, he was so homesick.

\* \* \* \*

**7/27** Tom Sullivan, who also served in the Pacific field of action in
World War II, called to tell me of a new book of stories of converts,
all of whom mentioned the Catholic Worker as being an influence. He said
he would send me a copy. It was reading **Sorrow Built a Bridge**, the
story of Rose Hawthorne, that influenced me. Now, many of our young
volunteers are working at the cancer hospital she founded. She also was
a convert.

\* \* \* \*

**7/29** Father Danny O'Shea, who runs the Rochester, New York Catholic
Worker house, visited and offered Sunday Mass for us in the auditorium
at Maryhouse, where we hold our Friday night meetings.****

\* \* \* \*

**8/1** Deane Mowrer, Jeannette Noel and Gary Donatelli had their day in
court for the Shoreham, Long Island anti-nuclear demonstration on June
3rd. All pleaded guilty and were released unconditionally. After the
trial, they picnicked at Jones Beach before returning home.

\* \* \* \*

**8/4** Brother Victor Avila and Margaret Mudd have given me a huge
volume of E. B. White's **Letters**. A New Englander, he wrote regularly
for the **New Yorker** magazine. I enjoy his writing of life on land and
shore in Maine. It is like **Pepys' Diary**. A most welcome gift!

\* \* \* \*

**8/5** We had an early Sunday Mass at Maryhouse this morning. Then, two
cars full of Catholic Workers headed off to the anti-nuclear
demonstration at the Con Edison plant up the Hudson River at Indian
Point, with Deane Mowrer very much a valiant leader. Pat and Kathleen
Jordan and their children also went to the demonstration. Others are
writing about it for this issue.

Jeannette Noel didn't join this demonstration. She is visiting the
Trappists in Spencer, Massachusetts. The Trappists (Massachusetts,
Georgia, Kentucky, Virginia, North Carolina, Utah, and New York, etc.)
have always been our friends, from our beginnings in the Thirties.

\* \* \* \*

**8/6** News of Jane O'Donnell's death. She worked long with us. We
called her "commando." I can see her yet, coming to my room and telling
me I was a bad example, reading late at night.

\* \* \* \*

**8/12** Seeing a review of a book on Thomas Mann in the **New York
Sunday Times** book review section, I recall that Peter Maurin brought
me Thomas Mann's **The Magic Mountain** to read and it gave me a
nightmare. Somebody in Union Square had given it to him and said Peter
reminded him of a character in it.

Our 11:30 a.m. Sunday Mass was said by Father Geoffrey Gneuhs,
white-robed in his Dominican habit. Father Geoff has written a book
about Peter Maurin. I hope some publisher will print it. He is a worker
and scholar whom Peter Maurin would have dearly loved.

\* \* \* \*

**8/14** Kathleen DeSutter Jordan visited with me this afternoon in our
backyard garden, which is blooming. Pat brought their children in from
Staten Island later on, and they all went to the free New York
Philharmonic concert in Central Park this evening.

\* \* \* \*

**8/16** Went to noonday Mass at our parish church. Several from the
Catholic Worker are still in the Westchester County Jail in Valhalla,
New York, since the Indian Point demonstration on August 5th. Ironic, to
have a jail in a place called Valhalla!

**8/19** Eileen Egan and Gordon Zahn are going to an international
conference for peace in Warsaw, Poland. Looking over my old diaries,
which include my travels with Eileen and also with Nina Polcyn Moore of
Minnesota, I overcame my envy. I have visited Australia, Singapore,
Tanzania, India, Italy, France, England, Poland and Russia.

I have just finished reading Gordon Zahn's latest book (on Catholic
conscientious objectors--the Stoddard and other Catholic camps),
**Another Part of the War--The Camp Simon Story** (Univ. of Mass.
Press).

\* \* \* \*

**8/21** Went to evening Mass at Nativity Church. Mary Lathrop Pope came
over for supper afterwards. Steve Kaune brought me a copy of **The Third
Man** by Graham Greene.

\* \* \* \*

**8/25** Tragedy â€“ a death. Charles Killian was faithful for years in
mailing out the paper. He came to Mass always.

\* \* \* \*

**8/27** My sister's sister-in-law, Doris Harmon, came by to bring us
some clothes and to visit. She is 89 years old, amazingly vigorous.

\* \* \* \*

**8/29** One of our first helpers on Fifteenth Street in 1933, Larry
Doyle called St. Joseph House and spoke with Jane Sammon. Larry also
helped Ade Bethune at her Newport, Rhode Island place. I hope he still
has his soft, Irish accent.

Stanley Vishnewski and I have been watching a television series,
**Against the Wind**, the tragic story of the Irish forced into
emigration from Ireland to Australia years ago. Violence continues in
Ireland. Now, news in the papers of the assassination of Lord
Mountbattan.

\* \* \* \*

**9/1** A furor in Maryhouse this morning. The kitchen door broke and
Janet was locked out of the kitchen--women howling for coffee and
breakfast!

Radio news of 3000 Soviet troops in Cuba. The Secretary of State is
warning Cuba about these troops. The President may seek an extra four
billion for the military!

Nearly 11 a.m. and no Frank yet with the **Times**, to satisfy my
curiosity on Cuba! My own articles on Cuba in **On Pilgrimage--The
Sixties** are interesting to me now.

\* \* \* \*

**9/6**Lee LeCuyer left for St. John's College, Annapolis, Maryland.
Frank, Jane and Kassie went with him in the van. Peter Maurin thought of
St. John's as one of the best colleges in the country.

\* \* \* \*

**9/10** Dan Mauk and Bob Ellsberg left for Europe. Our managing editors
are gadabouts, and that includes Peggy Scherer, who lived in Guatemala
for six months, and Jane Sammon and Marj Humphrey who were in Mexico and
El Salvador earlier this year. All three speak Spanish now. They follow
Peter Maurin's idea that scholars should be workers and workers,
scholars.
