% We Appeal To You
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1951, 2.

*Summary: Juxtaposes examples of destitution and need with instances of
prayers answered in this appeal for funds. Prays to the Little Flower to
help them make an oasis where love dwells. (DDLW \#625).*

Feast of the Little Flower.

Dear Fellow Workers in Christ:

Last month a baby was born on the Peter Maurin Farm and we rejoice. Last
week one of our staff found a week old baby abandoned in Nativity Church
entry, unwanted. One night a colored woman and a six-year-old boy came
asking for a bed. Yesterday I found Anna, the mad woman, sleeping in our
hallway. A woman with a nervous breakdown keeps trying for a job and
coming back for shelter again and again. And the four floors for men are
filled with those who come and go.

"So much with so little," not "so little and so late." This has been
running through my head as I thought of writing this appeal. It never
ceases to amaze us, how through all these eighteen years we can keep on
serving coffee, regardless of price, and soup and bread in so many of
our farms throughout the land. In New York five hundred or so come to be
fed. We don't actually count the servings. It's like having a family.
You hold your breath and wonder how many God is going to send.

I visited families last month where there were four children under three
and no twins. We take what comes, and the Spanish saying, a baby is
always born with a loaf of bread under its arm, is true. We have proved
it in our Catholic Worker farms, houses of hospitality, and families,
these many years. Voluntary Poverty works. It is practical, and we have
found it so by practicing it. Sometimes one feels it a joy and we do not
have to remind ourselves to rejoice always. But there are moments also
when it becomes appalling, when the pressure of people and human need
becomes overwhelming. But one can take time out to sit on a park bench
across the street and look at the children in the playground and pray
and the burden lifts.

All summer retreats have gone on at Maryfarm, Newburgh. At Peter Maurin
Farm, now one year old, there are old and young, sick and well, living
in community, baking for the breadline, gardening, maintaining an inn
which we try to make as happy and comfortable as possible.

One afternoon this summer, three little children and I were walking
through the fields and they showed me a Cross in the field over which
were growing clusters of grapes. We stopped to say a prayer, and I
suddenly thought to pray for the \$500 we needed to make a payment on
the mortgage the following week. That very evening a friend came to us
and told us he had the money for our use. God answers prayers. This we
know.

But He answers them through you, our readers, and through the saints who
watch over our work. The chapel on the farm at Staten Island is named
for the Little Flower so we say to her:

"Remember your happy life at home, your good father and mother and how
you used to go fishing and walking and picnicking, how you celebrated
the feast days of the church. Help us too to make others happy, because
when people are happy then it is easier for them to be good. Help us to
make a garden, an oasis, a little bit of Heaven here where love dwells.
Where love is, there God is."

Our wholesaler who provides us our flour, and our grocer on Mott Street,
have let our bills ride. The bill of the former is almost \$2,000 for
the past six months. We were horrified to see it climbing and have no
money to pay. But after all, it is little when you think of the tens of
thousands of meals served. So much for so little.

So we are begging you again for loaves and fishes, or the money to buy
them, and the Lord will multiply them for us.

Gratefully yours in Christ,

DOROTHY DAY.
