% On Pilgrimage - November 1951
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1951, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: In the midst of reporting on a twenty-seven city speaking trip
she laments that the state too often replaces personal responsibility
for the poor. Repeats that the fundamental idea of the Catholic Worker
is that we are made to love God and our brothers--the works of mercy
practiced by each of us "at a personal sacrifice." (DDLW \#626).*

In the last two months I have visited twenty-seven cities, journeying
from Fall River, Massachusetts, as far west as Fargo, North Dakota. I
have been bone-tired and mind-tired. I have slept like a log on busses
and on trains, on boards and on beds, in rooms with babies and little
children, in dormitories, and in single splendor. I have eaten in homes
where elegance is the rule and at houses of hospitality with men from
skid row. I have met old friends, and many new ones and have encountered
some bitterness but on the whole the trip was one of the best I ever
had. More and more, I have found people sympathetic to the fundamental
idea of **The Catholic Worker**. And what is the fundamental idea? That
man is made to love God and to love his brother. And when we say that
all men are brothers, it means that the love we feel stems from the love
of God.

We talk about love and we write about love, and love means that we must
give and we must suffer. Who is not poor and we are not poor, who does
not suffer, and we do not suffer? Love means embracing voluntary poverty
too. We have got to begin to be poor. If we try to be poor, we will try
to strip ourselves and put on Christ.

Love of our brothers, and voluntary poverty. Those are the things I
began to talk about, and those are such fundamental topics that one
could not talk about them without getting on to the subject of the
modern State and war. The paternalistic state, the servile state, the
coercive state that tries to do away with personal responsibility, that
builds great institutions to take the place of the family, the parish.
The coercive state whose prosperity is founded on preparations for war
rather than on work to supply human needs. You get a lot of reading done
when you are travelling, and one of the books I read on this trip was
"Through Eastern Eyes," by Fr. Von Straelen, published by Grailville,
Loveland, Ohio.

The East is not impressed by our great institutions, Fr. Von Straelen
quotes a critic as saying. Our orphanages, mental hospitals, homes for
the aged, -- all the other great buildings that loom on the horizon mean
that there is no longer a loving family, no longer help from friends and
neighbors to care for the sick, the orphaned, the cripple, the poor. It
is the failure of Christianity that those buildings express, not its
successes.

One reason for the breakdown of the family of course is that there is no
longer the home big enough for all, and there is not enough homes to go
around.

Martha House
------------

The last thing I saw in Detroit, so that I left it weeping, was the
thirteen children under six years old at Martha House, at 1818 Leverette
St. St. Francis House is just around the corner a couple of blocks, and
Louis Murphy and the men there try to do everything possible to make
Martha House warm and comfortable for the families sheltered there.
There are the three girls there too, Delros Espy, Ruth O'Rourke and
Betty Hogan. They share the parlour in that too small house and the four
mothers and their thirteen children are crowded into three bedrooms
upstairs. There is a sitting room and a dining room and kitchen.

With all our institutions, with all the wealth in the city of Detroit,
charitable bureaus, travelers' aid, the police, hospitals, priests, --
all turn again and again to **The Catholic Worker**, for help in
emergencies.

"And for every family we take in, we have to turn ten way," one of the
girls said sadly.

"And where do they go? They sit up all night in stations, in movie
houses, in parking lots," Lou Murphy said. And after they have been
referred around sufficiently and still don't get lost, some agency, or
the city, rents a room for them for twelve or fifteen dollars a week, --
one room for a family of ten, perhaps, -- eight children and mother and
father. Of course the only place they get such a room is in a slum.

It is the same in New York. The influx of Puerto Ricans in our lower
East side has meant the growth of rooming houses where whole families
live in one room and cook, eat and sleep. There are no apartments so the
city has to put its welfare clients in these hovels.

Hospices
--------

Of course when I talk of our houses of hospitality everyone thinks right
away that what I mean is that he should start a house of hospitality in
his city or parish. People start to look uncomfortable and people talk
about guilty consciences for not doing more for the poor. I always speak
too, of how these duties are laid down for us in the 25^th^ chapter of
St. Matthew and that our salvation indeed depends on them -- prayer, and
fasting, and the alms which we would have to give as a result of fasting
(whether that fast be in terms of food, or drink, theater or television
or new car or a certain neighborhood to live in).

But I try always to explain that it is not just in terms of Peter
Maurin's program of Round Table Discussions, Houses of Hospitality and
Farming Communes that I am speaking. He said at the very beginning that
the way to reach the masses of people, the poor and the destitute who
did not know Christ (if they did they would be rich) was through the
works of mercy, practiced by each one of us, "at a personal sacrifice,"
he always added.

Christ Rooms
------------

And since it all does depend on each one of us, that means that we must
each try to have a Christ room in our homes where we can shelter others.
Better still if there were an extra floor in our house (Oh those lucky
people who live in houses!) that could be turned into a little apartment
for a family. The fact of the matter is that so-called Christian people
will not rent to families any more. No children allowed! Let them get in
a housing project! Let the state, the city, bring that pressure to bear
on them to limiting their families!

One woman looked at me sadly as I talked one afternoon, and said that
she had four bedrooms and two baths in her house. And another said
ruefully, "we are always on the receiving end, never the giving."

Difficulties
------------

I can well see all the difficulties. A husband cannot impose such a
charitable custom on his wife, as sheltering the harborless, without her
consent and cooperation, nor the wife the husband. But they can begin to
talk over these things together, to explore the possibilities. People
could begin to think about these things. When they build or when they
rent, they can get a bigger place and sometimes the bigger houses are
cheaper since people want small, compact places nowadays when there will
not be so much to do, nor so much trouble in heating. But they might
begin to think in terms of community! After all community can be in the
city as well as in the country.

Community
---------

One friend I visited in Chicago had an apartment that was large, light
and airy, surrounded by a garden and trees, with a back porch and a
front porch, with heat and bath and hot water, all for forty dollars a
month. This was because she put up with the railroad trains down the
street, and gas tanks in the rear.

She was definitely on the wrong side of the tracks. Downstairs there was
another large apartment divided into two. Negroes were beginning to move
into the neighborhood. In this section of the south side there was not
that mass movement out of a neighborhood when Negroes moved in that has
marked some of the districts in Chicago. All around the Chicago
University, another friend who teaches there reports, there have been a
steady influx of Negroes, who have taken run down property and improved
it and since there is good supervision to prevent dividing and
overcrowding slum conditions did not begin to be built up.

The friend with the beautiful apartment said that there was a
possibility of the building being sold. It had not occurred to her to
try to buy it. Poor teachers usually do not have down payments. But
given the down payment, most people could keep up payments, what with
one job or another in a big city. They would be willing to make many a
sacrifice to keep their own home, especially such a one as this. She
could even rent to Negroes and so have an interracial house, or she
could divide the house so that it was cooperatively owned. I had heard
that Fr. Lux, the Dominican, when he was stationed in Chicago, had seen
to it that an eight-apartment house was bought cooperatively by Negroes
and reconditioned. So much could be done in the way of housing if people
had vision. So much misery could be alleviated.

The children of this world are wiser in their generation than the
children of light. They build up fortunes and lose them. They bring pipe
lines from west to east. They put up gigantic skyscrapers, they build
factories, they venture much, not for the common good but for profit.
And why not these risks for the common good?

There is a new book out by Allan Watts, called *The Wisdom of
Insecurity* published by Pantheon Press in New York, which sounds
fascinating. We children of light, who have everything to gain, hang
onto our husks and our potage as though this were to be all for this
world and the next.

Hierarchy
---------

The statement of the hierarchy of Australia last month made my task of
talking about the poor and the destitute all the easier.

"To the north of Australia lie a thousand million people suffering from
a dreadful poverty which must be seen to be realized," the statement
reads. "How was it that a few million Australians maintained their
independence and their comfort in the fact of such a set of
circumstances?" And the answer made by the Archbishops was, "militarism,
colonialism, exploitation."

The recent Popes have talked of an attack on poverty, before they speak
of attacking Communism. "Go to the poor," Pius XI cried out. All the
saints have begun their mission by seeking Christ among the poor.

Report
------

But this article was to be a report, and there is too much to report. I
spoke at Dayton and at Lima. In Chicago I spoke at five high schools, at
St. Procopius Abbey, at the Sheil school, at the Calvert Club, at the
Thomas Moore book club, at Friendship House. I visited the John Mella
family and all their children, and one of them dying so they need
prayers. I visited the Al Reser's and another baby is due there. I had
breakfast with Jacques Maritain and the O'Mearas and the Neffs, after
Mass on the feast of Christ the King and I had dinner at the Peter
Maurin House just south of Grand Street on Ogden and Hubbard on
Chicago's near northwest side, with eighteen men and Betty Schneider of
Friendship House and Fr. Cantwell and Father Chrysostom. John Boylston,
Ruth Ann Heaney's brother, is living in the house, and Ed Boylston his
brother is helping serve the line on West Madison Street at night, and
Bob Bosshart is director of the house which is as comfortable a little
center as any I've seen. But they need more room. They have light and
air, and cleanliness and color, but they need space. As usual the
kitchen was the heart of the home and the cooking was excellent.

Another day I visited Fr. Carrabine, and lunched with Lois Schumacher
and dined with the Spencers. There were a dozen more things I wanted to
do in Chicago but there were speaking engagements that I had to make so
I could not stay as long as I wished. I like Chicago. There are still
conductors as well as motormen on the street cars (the fare is 18c) and
there are many small houses and trees and grass plots in the slums.
There is the smell of burning leaves, there is the walk along the
lakefront, there is the narrow twisting river with its many bridges.

Appleton, Wis.
--------------

Appleton is the home of the infamous Senator McCarthy, and it is also
the home of my friends, Emmett and Mary Durnin, and I stopped by for the
day to visit them. They had lost their oldest daughter, two months ago,
of leukemia, and it was wonderful to see the fortitude with which they
accepted their loss. "She knew she was going to die," Mary said, "and we
helped her prepare for it. She liked to have us read to her, and I read
her the story of Marie Goretti, and Emmett read her *The Greatest Story
Ever Told*. She was only sick a month. She was only eight but she was
such a help always, and she helped other mothers in the neighborhood
too."

Emmett used to drive a ten-ton truck in New York; now he works in a
paper mill. The neighborhood they live in is a real little community
with the mutual aid and sharing which comes in poorer communities. The
houses are on the edge of town and the children walk over a mile into
school every day. All around are fields and woods and Mary is happy that
the move was made away from New York two years ago.

St. Cloud
---------

I had a good visit with the Humphreys for several days. Mary and Don
have seven children now, John and Rachel, Michael, Sue, Paul, Thomas and
Mary Ellen, and she is my godchild. I had time to knit her a pair of
pink socks while I was there, and there were great talks with Don who
had spent an idyllic winter or so up at St. Isadore's farm in northern
Minnesota with Al and Catherine Reser and their children the first years
of the war. There were nostalgic yarns about hunting and fishing, and
wood chopping and the log cabins that the families lived in. Martie
Paul, who is now at Holy Family Farm at Rhineland, Mo., built the cabins
with the help of some of the men from the Minneapolis House of
Hospitality. He was the pioneer at the Minnesota farm.

Don makes chalices now and he has a big work shop in back of the house
where he works. The furniture in the house is his own, he is a versatile
craftsman as well as artist and the entire lower floor of the ten-room
brick house which they recently bought after a sale of Don's pictures
(he is also a painter of distinction, and a muralist, if there is such a
word) is almost all one room, what with the knocking out of partitions.
There was a big kitchen range giving good heat, and as usual with
Catholic Worker families, no bath, and the usual outhouse. But Don's was
unusual in that it had no door!

Mary is a valiant woman who sews for the entire family, weaves, cooks,
and cares for her large family with a great ease and calm that are
refreshing indeed.

There were so many in Minnesota to visit, and so many speeches to make.
I spoke at St. John's, had a good visit with the new Abbot, Baldwin
Dvorak and with Fr. Godfrey, editor of Orate Fratres. And more families,
the Cottons, the Doyles. I stayed at Maryfarm in Little Canada, St.
Paul, and spoke at Mendota and in Minneapolis.

The last engagement was in Fargo, North Dakota, where it was good to see
Father Robert Havda again and to get the promise from him that he would
come to us next summer for a week's discussion on war and peace, for
conscientious objectors from past and present wars. There was a good and
friendly audience there, many of them coming from towns all around, and
I felt the warmth of the people and priests in this section. I should
have liked to have stayed to visit the beet fields and the sugar beet
factory that controls the situation out there, and to go on further
west, but I had been away almost two months and was anxious to get home.

Korean Soldiers
---------------

The bus coming east from Fargo was all the way from Seattle, and there
were half a dozen soldiers who had just returned from Korea. The boy
next to me talked to me about the "enemy." There was no end to them, he
said -- you just felt there were countless millions, coming on and on,
and no matter how you shot into them, they kept coming. Your machine gun
would get hot, so hot you'd have to abandon it and they keep coming.
There are women in the army, too. All over the world now the women are
in the armies. We're just where we were when we started, he said, and we
will have to stay unless war starts some place else. No one sees an end
to it. They live like animals. They eat cat, dog, dried fish, rice. Yes
he was glad to get home and it was a long trip. He'd have to go all the
way to the east coast. Why didn't he go by coach plane? Why it cost
\$113 dollars and it was only \$53 by bus. You could live a long time on
sixty dollars! God bless him.

Home Again
----------

And now I am home again, writing this on Chrystie Street and it is
midnight, All Saints Day. The house is quiet. Not long since I went down
into the kitchen to get myself some toast and coffee to keep awake.
There's always two or three of the men there to help you, and Michael
was standing over the radio getting the late news. Outside the cars go
by in a continual stream down Chrystie Street which is like a boulevard.
There are still yellow leaves on the plane trees across the street. The
streets are still noisy but the house is quiet. It is cold out and a
good part of the day it rained. Bu the house is warm, and there are
blankets for the beds. Charlie McCormick has gone down to Staten Island
to fetch in a load of bread for the coffee line in the morning, the good
whole wheat bread, that Bill McAndrews makes every other day. Tomorrow
night Bill will bring in another load which will do us for over the
weekend.

We had Mass down there in Staten Island this morning, on the Peter
Maurin Farm, in the new chapel which Hans Tunnesen and Ed Foerster have
been working on for months. The rain poured down, drumming on the roof
so that you could scarcely hear the chant, and anyway it was only Jane
and Joe Cueller who could sing. Our voices were faint with the cold,
because the chapel is not heated yet, no stove up, and our breath made a
cloud before us. Beckie, Susie and Eric were there with Tamar, and
Nickie and Mary were still in bed. David had gone early to work.

It is a beautiful feast day and I am happy to be home. I am happy too
that this long account is ended, and now I can feel my trip is really
over.
