% On Pilgrimage - July/August 1952
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1952, 2, 7.

*Summary: On the feast of the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary she
appreciates the work of mothers and the practice of the presence of God
in the smallest acts. Describes Tamar's family and their house where she
is caring for the grandchildren while Tamar and David have a vacation.
Describes life with the children and lauds "manual labor as part of a
penitential aw well as creative life." (DDLW \#636).*

Today is the feast of the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary. On such
a feast when I am saying the Joyful Mysteries, I think of my sister or
daughter, and of visits to them. It is fitting also to think especially
of young mothers who are pregnant, since Mary was with child when she
went to visit her cousin Elizabeth who was also with child. Such
distractions make the meditation very much alive.

She went with haste, over the hills, and she was very young, only
sixteen tradition tells us, and she must have been very beautiful and
quiet and eager. I love to read of her going with haste. The lesson in
the missal for this day is from the Canticle of Canticles.

"See where he comes, how he speeds over the mountains, how he spurns the
hills. No doe, nor fawn was ever so fleet of foot as my beloved. And now
he is standing on the other side of the wall; now he is looking in
through each window in turn, peering through every chink. I can hear my
beloved calling to me, Rise up, rise up quickly, dear heart, so gentle,
so beautiful, rise up and come with me. Winter is over now, the rain has
passed by. At home, the flowers have begun to blossom; pruning time has
come; we can hear the turtle doves cooing already, there at home. There
is green fruit on the fig trees; the vines in flower are all fragrance.
Rouse thee and come, so beautiful, so well beloved, still hiding thyself
as a dove hides in a cleft rock or crannied wall. Show me but thy face,
let me hear thy voice, that voice sweet as thy face is fair."

- - -

Tomorrow I am beginning a visit of a week with my grandchildren, while
Tamar and David go on a vacation and the rest of this column will not be
written on this donated typewriter, a very good rebuilt one, which came
in answer to my appeal last month, the gift of a father of five children
and himself a poor man I am sure; but I will be writing by hand under
the mulberry trees, in snatches, and I will write to rest myself, and to
recollect myself, and it will be a form of meditation, another way of
practicing the presence of God. I will write at night when the children
go to bed and I will try to be conscientious in keeping this little
diary, for the sake of all the other mothers of small children who are
trying to lead the spiritual life, a supernatural life, and who feel
submerged, exhausted, by the weight of the physical.

- - -

Everyone knows the little booklet by Brother Lawrence, **The Practice of
the Presence of God**. It is claimed by Quakers, Episcopalians,
Lutherans, many others, just as Thomas a Kempis is claimed by all.

**The Way of the Pilgrim** is another little book written by a Russian
Pilgrim who was looking for a spiritual leader who would teach him how
to pray without ceasing as we are told to do by St. Paul. One of our
readers sent me this last month, and I hear that Harpers is going to
bring it out soon. It is included in **A Treasury of Russian
Spirituality**, published by Sheed & Ward.

Just last week at Wainwright House, the headquarters for the Layman's
Movement where I spoke, a little pamphlet was handed me, **"Letters by a
Modern Mystic"** containing some of the writing of Dr. Laubach, on this
same subject, practicing the presence of God. In his letters he begs
other to write of their experiences along these lines.

I believe too, that this practice of the presence of God, is the Little
Way of the Little Flower, the saint of our times who spoke of her way of
spiritual childhood, which consisted in doing everything for the love of
God, even to the picking up of a thread from the floor. For mothers who
bend ceaselessly in their futile attempts to achieve some order in a
household of small ones, the sanctification of the smallest action will
be of comfort.

"All is grace," St. Therese exclaimed, even, I suppose, to the spooning
of oatmeal into tiny mouths, only to see the oatmeal smeared a moment
later in the hair. Oh patience, patience! One may laugh but it is a
suffering.

\*\*\*
---

Last night I arrived at my daughter's so that Tamar could tell me what
Mary should eat, what her schedule is and so on. Mary is eleven months
old; Nickie is 2 and a half, Eric is 4 and a half, Sue will be 6 in Auguest and becky is 7 and a half.  In addition to his job in New York, David has a little mail order book business, handling distributist books. We must emphasize the fact
that it is a "mail order" affair since several times recently people
have come all the way from New York hoping to find a book shop at 201
Winant Ave. and have been very much taken aback to find a shabby
unpainted cottage of five rooms and attic and porch, set back from a
cinder road where there are only six other houses in the midst of four
acres of burnt over wilderness. This section of Staten Island which used
to be a fertile place before the days of Jersey industrialism and smog,
is sparsely inhabited and is reached by taking an Arthur Kill Road bus
which goes from St. George to Tottenville, a ride of an hour and a half.
David's place is about 55 minutes from the ferry, and when you get off
the bus you climb a gentle hill through fields of second growth and
tangled underbrush. In the spring frogs are vibrant in the marshes, and
in the summer the song of crickets and katydids and cicadas fill the air
and the birds, thank God, are not discouraged by the smog but fill the
trees with their warblings.

\*\*\*
---

The house that David and Tamar are now living in had been rented for the
past ten years and has not been painted in all that time. It has been
ill-treated as all rented houses are and it is in bad need of repair.
But when it was ten above zero it was warm and these last dog days of
July it has been comfortable too, except in the attic.

It is a shabby house, but solid, and the sun shines in the kitchen and
living room in the morning and in the three bedrooms in the afternoon.
There is electricity and a big enough bathroom to accommodate the
washing machine which Tamar acquired after her fifth child.

(This little account of the physical aspects of her existence is owing
to our readers who have read **On Pilgrimage**, the collected columns
published a few years ago which contained an account of Hennessy life
before Eric was born, on a West Virginia farm where there was neither
running water nor electricity. The farm had cost \$1200 and was a dream
of a place scenically but it was twelve miles from town and church and
school and doctor or any kind of a job and one cannot earn a living for
a growing family under those circumstances, if one has been brought up
in the city and has not the skills or strength required for country
work. And there was the loneliness too, of living for three years in a
community where there were no Catholics for ten miles. No neighbors
called, only one old woman and her two young foster children.) When
David acquired a job which took him away from West Virginia, they sold
the place to a Washington family who drive out weekends and spend their
holidays there.

\*\*\*
---

The Staten Island house with its four acres cost \$6000. I know it is
not fashionable to talk about money and the cost of things, but these
days when no one can rent a house and young families are thinking of
down payments, it is practical to talk about prices. The last issue of
Integrity was all about Housing, but there was no mention of costs, or
land values, except in the most general terms. In these days it is
considered to be just as indelicate to talk about money as it is about
God.

\*\*\*
---

But we like to call attention to the fact that in New York City, if one
has to work there, there is a possibility to live on "the wrong side of
the tracks" and have space for garden and goat, chickens and geese, and
if there are no neighbors to complain, pigs and a cow. On Winant Avenue
there are Norwegians, Italians, Irish, colored and white. Truly an
American street, and some children go to public school and some to St.
Louis Academy or the Tottenville parochial school.

\*\*\*
---

David commutes four hours a day, however, two coming and two going, and
that means bus and ferry and again a bus; but there is rest for the eyes
and refreshment for the nostril on these trips. Thank God for the five
day week, however, for the proletariat who sees no way out of his
proletariat condition.

\*\*\*
---

The children all woke up bright and early this morning, afraid their
mother would leave before they got up. But she had a full day before
her. She had not slept, she said, for two nights, she was so excited at
the idea of a trip, but young mothers are used to broken sleep. She was
vigorous enough to mop the living room, kitchen, bathroom and bedroom
floors which the children had previously swept out.

She kept remembering things in the course of the morning: "The clorox is
under the sink in the bathroom, and the mouse poison and poison ivy
powder is under the back stairs." Then she went out to water the geese
who were waddling around the front door. "They are a grazing creature
and have to run loose, but ah me, what is going to happen to my garden."

Becky will be a goose girl, we decided, like the maidens in the fairy
tale and keep shooing them when they stray in the wrong places.

- - -\*\*\*
---
It has been very hot these last weeks and there has been no rain. The
leaves of the sassafras tree are turning and dropping already and the
children had been making collections of them. Tamar went to water the
garden, tie up the tomato vines and bury the garbage. Finally she was
finished.

As the time approached for her to leave, I too began to anticipate
homesickness for her, as well as the children, so we planned a little
expedition ourselves. As Tamar stood at the road looking pretty and
fresh in her pink nylon, her little suit case in her hand, I piled
Nickie and Mary in the carriage and with the other three hopping with
excitement, we set off in different directions, we to Peter Maurin Farm,
and Tamar down the road to catch the three-fifteen bus. We were all
going places, so it was all right. At the farm the Smith children and
the Hennessy children fell into each others' arms and we stayed for
supper, and a happy time was had. By the time we walked home a little
breeze had sprung up, baths were in order, and at eight o'clock the
great silence had descended on the house.

In the morning we sit out under the mulberry trees to say our morning
prayers. Which means that I read Matins from the layfolk's breviary and
the three oldest children join in the **Our Father** and the **Glory be
to the Father**. Nickie sat entranced for a time and then he began
making a tower out of beer cans, screaming whenever they fell down. When
we had finished Matins and sang the Salve Regina (the children much
prefer English hymns) everyone scattered.

The days are busy. The children awake at seven and the sun is already
high. There was only one shade in the living room facing east, so I put
up a dark blanket at the upper part of the other window to keep out the
glare. There are so many needs around the house. Screening, shades,
linoleum, paint--all things that cost money. It is no use saying hard
work is enough. Materials are needed to work with. It is a part of
poverty to do without these things, to have insufficient strength to
take care of five children, wash, cook, clean, garden and can. (It is a
part of destitution to have no philosophy of work as well as no
philosophy of poverty and not to accept manual labor as part of a
penitential as well as creative life.)

And all the futilities, the obstructions, the interruptions of any kind
of work. The geese have gotten into the garden and stripped the kale,
cabbages and broccoli plants. There has been no rain. "All nature itself
travailleth and groaneth."

The children are always ravenous. Mary Elizabeth is like a little bird
with her mouth always open. She has three good meals a day and milk in
between. And in spite of garden, how much work and money it takes.

The days fly by. It is a good life, a life removed from the world and
yet close to life, to reality. One does not have to listen to the news
repeated twenty-four times a day, every hour on the hour, over and over
again. It is one thing to turn to God seven times daily, at Matins,
Lauds, Prime, Terce, Sext, None, Vespers (and Compline thrown in for
good measure). It is better to practice the presence of God and pray
without ceasing as Fr. Wm. Doyle did.

The great temptation for the mother is to stay up late and savor the
silence and peace, to read a little, to sew a little. Physical fatigue
is great and it is a joy to relax. The children all sleep through the
night and don't stir after they touch the pillow. So my nights were
refreshing.

Tamar left Thursday; the family wedding in Washington was on Friday.
Saturday they drove on to West Virginia and spent the night with Mrs.
Fearnow. "The new family in our old house are also poor," Tamar said
happily, "and so they appreciate everything we had and did. They used
all the old furniture we left, and have taken care of the perennials and
fruit trees we planted. The land is cultivated and they've drained the
lower meadow."

After Mass at Berkeley Springs, they had driven on to Hamburg to see
Dick Ahern and his successful farm, and from there to Easton where they
saw Helen Montague and the Franklins who have our old lower farm.

Monday night they were home (and I had not expected them till Tuesday.)

That, one might say, was my vacation. We have been busy enough the rest
of the summer, with the ordinary life of Chrystie Street, and Sunday to
Wednesday of one week at Pendle Hill, Philadelphia to speak to the
Quakers.
