% St. Joseph's House (Chrystie St.)
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1955, 7, 8.

*Summary: Chronicles life at St. Joseph's House: repairs, grocery bills
for "the line", managing subscriptions, endless mail and visitors. Asks
St. Joseph to "impel" readers to help pay the grocery bills. (DDLW
\#692).*

I'd like to call this just Chrystie Street, but our readers might jump
to the conclusion that Tom Sullivan is back from the Trappists.
Yesterday we received a letter from Jack English (Brother Charles) who
is also at Our Lady of the Holy Ghost Monastery at Conyers, Ga. and all
is well on that prayer front. So it is up to someone to write of the
goings on around Chrystie Street. To begin with the front of the house
â€“the rain, I notice, has washed the bricks on one side to a pale pink.
Grass is growing along the edges of the fenced-in lot next door which
has become a parking lot, the old theater on the corner has put up a
heavy "riot fence" as they used to be called during industrial strikes,
so that the men that make up the **Catholic Worker** breadline cannot
make a jungle of either the lot or the space under the fire escapes
which are roofed with corrugated sheet iron. Many were the little camp
fires burning there at night, close against the building, many were the
men sleeping against the side of the building. Now they seek darker
corners, more sheltered doorways.

Larry the painter continues to keep us shipshape and the doors and
window trim on the first floors are painted. Inside the house, we have
replaced the old linoleum on the first two floors. Pete and Roger were
given the good heavy floor covering by the Sisters at St. Rose's Cancer
Home, and one of our guests who is from the west coast spent days in
putting it down. Larry the cook continues in the kitchen through the
hottest of the Summer, and Marty and Roy over the dish pans. The sink is
rusting out and springing new leaks daily and we sadly need to replace
them. Jack English purchased them when we moved here five years ago.
We'll get him to pray for money for a new one.

Bread keeps coming in from the Divine Providence temporary shelter for
children, and Al Gallion, who does all the driving now, picks it up
daily. But the food bill has mounted perilously. Tony de Falco called up
this morning. He has the corner grocery at Hester and Mott Streets and
we have traded with him and his family since 1936. He always has let us
charge our groceries and comparing prices, he's been as reasonable as
most wholesalers. When we were getting our new headquarters here five
years ago, he let the bill go up into the thousands and we never really
caught up again. Right now the bill is five thousand dollars, a heavy,
heavy load for him to carry and for us to owe him. Ammon's fast of ten
days did a little to lower it! Guess we'd all better do a little more
fasting. Trouble is, even going on that principle, "everybody take a
little less, and there'll be enough to feed more," more and more always
are arriving. Our guests start arriving at five, lining up for coffee
and bread; two hundred or so then. The house, about fifty-five of us,
eat at seven thirty; the house eats again at eleven thirty. There are
pancakes today, and Smokey Joe, who was in the marines, is reminded of
tug boats and calls them collision mats. The line comes again at one
o'clock, two to three hundred servings of soup and bread; then there is
a lull until supper time at five thirty, and last night there were
seventy-five sitting down to table. The extra at night are mostly women
who live at the Salvation army or in the neighborhood who earn enough to
pay for their lodging, but not quite enough to eat on. There's the woman
who sells pencils and chewing gum, who has the deaf and dumb son. There
is the old Jewish woman with the scarf around her head who gets feebler,
day by day. She is clean and well cared for, but we don't know where she
lives or who her people are. She just comes in and sits down and eats,
and when she leaves she puts a half dozen slices of bread in her pocket
book.

File Room
---------

The only place in the house that is really quiet is the file room where
right now Bob Steed and Tom Caine and Carol Perry are trying to catch up
on new subscriptions, changes of address, carding of contributions
whether they are the apron sent in this morning from St. Paul, Minn.,
bundles of clothes, or the dollar that came in this morning, We don't
file many letters any more, we just make a note on the card--"letter
about the land." "Interested in works of mercy," "Conscientious
objector." "Objector to conscientious objector." Enough mail comes in
every day to keep us busy answering letters and visitors come in from
all parts of the country and from the world, and the people of the
household drift in and out of the office which makes it hard to
concentrate. The tradition is that the downstairs office is business and
people must be quiet to concentrate. But here, we are only typing
letters or stores, or visiting, so there is chatter and comings and
goings not only from outsiders but from insiders.

Old Joe Davin was not happy on Welfare Island and now he is home again.
He thought he would like it having worked there once, but he was lonely
and now he is home again in the bosom of the family with everyone
dropping in and out and offering him cold drinks, hot drinks, meals and
between meal snacks. Surely there is a deep significance in that phrase,
"they knew Him in the breaking of bread of bread." When people share
food together they are communing, they are comforting one another.
That's why our grocery bills are so high, there is so much of it done
around here.

When I was a little girl my mother used to impress on us all that it was
a terrible thing to hint. I remember one occasion especially of a visit
we paid and I kept hinting that I liked the doll my little friend had. I
got it when I got home, but not the doll.

Tom Cain helps us in the file room, and translates Fr. Ude for us, and
letters beautiful little mottos to decorate the house. I have one on my
desk, "Unto old age and grey hairs O lord, forsake me not." He just came
in and said that we had a cricket in the back yard! We have two privet
hedges transplanted from the Hennessy acres a few years ago, and one
vine of ivy, and that represents the vegetable kingdom. We have plenty
of cats, and one black dog. And now a cricket praising God out there. A
cheerful note.

During the summer we received three statues of St. Joseph, all of them
works of art, which surely should be a sign that our good friend is
watching over us. St. Teresa of Avila said that she never asked anything
of St. Joseph that it was not granted. So we ask him to impel you to
help. Paying the grocery bills is casting bread on the waters. It will
return a hundred fold.

*DOROTHY DAY*
