% Community of Brothers
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1955, 1, 7.

*Summary: An appreciation of community life in a Bruderhof of 175
people. Describes the division of labor, the "rich poverty" with
artists, musicians, and worship. Recalling Peter Maurin's vision of
farming communes she wishes for more such Catholic communities. (DDLW
\#695).*

The community of families living at Woodcrest, Rifton, New York, this
year and last year and a half, numbering by now perhaps 175 people,
including many children is still called a Bruderhof, though there seems
to be some attempt to drop the German name. It is one of a group of
communities, which we have been acquainted with since 1938 or
thereabouts, when we met two of the Brothers who were on their way from
visiting a like community (one of the Hutterite colonies in North
Dakota) to Paraguay where they were seeking a settlement for the
overflow of their community in England, at Wheathill in Shropshire. We
have kept in touch with the community in Paraguay and many of our
friends have visited there and participated in some of the incredible
hardships of pioneer life in a new country. Grace Rhoads, a Philadelphia
friend, went to join them in Paraguay, and Hector Black, who spent a
summer with us at Chrystie St., and at Peter Maurin farm has also joined
them.

These are non-Catholic communities of course, but there is the saying
that the nearer men approach to God, the nearer they are to each other,
and in our studies and desires to grow in love of brother and so in love
of God, we have always felt that The Catholic Worker community (which is
made up of our friends and readers all over the country) and the
Bruderhof communities, were very close to each other in love.

Peter Maurin in his peasant love of the land, in his dealing with the
problems of unemployment, family life, mental health and physical
health, always taught "farming communes." He called attention to the
attempts at community of goods in our time in the cooperatives in Nova
Scotia, in the Kibbutzim of Palestine, early attempts at community of
families throughout the United States. He urged study of religious
community, especially of Benedictine monasteries as models of community
life, and urged that families come together to live in this way, making
a living by a diversity of talents, as well as by farming. This of
course pointed to the development of crafts as a means of earning a
living. He never actually made blue prints of the kind of community that
would suit our day and age, but he looked for leaders and skilled
workers to lead the way.

At Rifton, New York, a toymaking shop is busy from morning until night
turning out sturdy toys, rockers, whirligigs, wheelbarrows, carts,
blocks, trains,-- everything made with wood and so beautifully and
expertly finished, so strong that a multitude of children could use them
without destroying them (Catalogues will be sent on request, from
Woodcrest, Rifton, New York.)

Last summer when we moved from Maryfarm, Newburgh, to Peter Maurin Farm,
Staten Island, our work was made much easier by the truly brotherly
cooperation of this group. They made three or four trips with their
truck, and assisted Pete Asaro with all the work he did. They visit us
periodically with gifts of clothes for the families and the homeless men
and women who stay at the Municipal shelters in our neighborhood.

Last summer Paulina Sturm drove a group from The Catholic Worker in her
station wagon, and Hans came back enthusiastic over the kitchen and
dining room. He has worked in cramped quarters for so long.

A few weeks ago, Julie Lien and I took an eight-thirty Trailways bus at
the Dixie Terminal and sped up the new thoroughway for a two hour trip
through glorious countryside and got off at the Wallkill River Bridge,
not far out of New Paltz. There we were met by Bruce Sumner and Hector
(Duffy) Black, and a short drive down the road along the river brought
us to a mountain road on the right, winding up a mile to Woodcrest.
There a group of buildings surround a mansion which is now a school on
the first floor, and homes for families on the next two floors. It was a
morning recess from school and children were playing all around the
broad lawns. Older children walk down the road each morning to catch the
bus a mile away for the junior and senior high schools in the district.

Two things impressed me a once. One was that all the children were
warmly and shabbily dressed,-- no attempts at slick haircuts or
Hollywood glamour such as you find even in the slums in the cities.
Right there is a great economy and saving not only of money but of time
and wear to tear to the spirit. There was no keeping up with the Joneses
here. The second thing was, that like The Catholic Worker hospices,
every inch of space is utilized. The basement of the big house is a
laundry and there are several battered old washing machines which will
be used daily until they break down and some proper equipment for
laundering for 175 people can be worked out. We too have a large family
sized washer at Chrystie street that is always breaking down and costs a
fortune to keep going. Not to speak of the hot water used.

The school rooms are high-ceilinged with enormous windows and one
wonders how costly it will be to heat the place. "The extravagance of
the poor," as Louis Murphy says. But with the numbers of men, the
talents of the workers, the discipline of the group, all these needs can
be worked out and it is worthwhile spending money to keep the basic
needs for food, shelter, warmth attended to. There are trained teachers
among the women, including a trained nurse. The women who are busy in
the laundry and school room, have their children cared for in turn by
nursery teachers. The children eat separately except for three or four
times a week when there are family meals. We went around during the
evening meal and peeked in on the babies, all earnestly eating big bowls
of applesauce and cereal.

Where there are enough people, that means many more than we have ever
had on any of our Catholic Worker Farms, there is a real division of
labor. There are the men who take care of the vegetable gardens, the
incipient orchards, the heating, the wood chopping, the toy plant, a
real factory, the driving, marketing, speaking, writing(even the
advertising of toys) and so on. The discipline of accepting the work
apportioned out and doing an honest day's work is something expected of
those who make application to join the community. (People live together
in community for some years before being formally accepted as part of
the Society of Brothers.) Also, the community of goods is a fixed
principle. Before families come, they literally sell what they have and
come and lay it at the feet of those members in the group who are in
charge. If they have a hundred dollars or a thousand dollars, or their
bare hands, they offer it honestly. There are no reservations. It is
truly a Christian communism such as that of monasteries, convents, such
as that of families in the Hutterite Colonies which I wrote of last
February in The Catholic Worker.

Such Poverty as the members of the community accept does not mean the
suffering of destitution. As a matter of fact, it is a "rich poverty"
which means that talents of artists, musicians and so on are at the
disposal of all. There is folk dancing and singing and those recreations
which freshen and recreate in the true sense of the word are enjoyed and
participated in by all. They are not just watchers, hearers, but
participators. There are walks for the children and they are treated as
children who need to be taught on their level. There is hymn singing and
prayer, and meetings for worship and Sundays the whole group come
together for service. If this were a Catholic community of families,
there would be a daily mass, (participated in by the congregation, which
would mean a sung Mass) and probably rosary and compline as we have it
on our farms. And of course our Sundays, beginning with Mass and
continuing through the day with conferences and Benediction. There is
one such a community of Catholic families in England, made up of a small
group of oblates of St. Benedict who with wives and children and some
single people are living this community life near Prinknash Abbey. We
have had an article on this in a back issue of The Catholic Worker.
Would that there were so many such Catholic Communities.

(Continued in January issue)
