% On Pilgrimage - May 1956
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1956, 7.

*Summary: Responds to a newspaper article about herself and the Catholic
Worker movement. Disagrees with elements of the articles, in particular
the description of those who are served and the workers as "derelicts."
Urges an understanding of the poor that embraces Christ's message.
Discusses Orwell's and Tolstoi's views of the poor. Describes the rich
life of those who participate in the Catholic Worker movement and
contrasts elements of the Worker program to that found in city missions.
(DDLW \#706).*

Reactions to Publicity
---

In a way it is a matter for rejoicing when suddenly a great deal of
attention, unsolicited, is given to the work, by newspapers, radio,
television and news weeklies. It demonstrates the fact that the words of
the Holy Father calling on all men to perform the works of mercy, to
share their goods with the poor, find a response; that there is a great
store of goodness and generosity in everyone. At the same time, there is
something distressing too about publicity. As the philosopher said when
he received a great deal of applause - - "what have I done wrong now?"
The normal life of the Christian is one of suffering and failure, the
folly of the cross, and in the acceptance of these there is growth and
progress and fulfillment and unspeakable joy. The beatitudes, the
blessings of the sermon on the mountain are all for the poor, the
sufferer, the persecuted, the despised. And when we are getting so much
favorable attention, we are not the blessed, according to the gospel!
Oh, the paradox of Christianity!

But there are plenty of thorns in the roses and I'll enumerate a few.
Just as I always talk about Peter or Ammon, when I am illustrating ideas
in relation to the work (and about others too), so the reporters chose
to write about me. Since I also have written about myself, and used the
personal approach as all women reporters are taught to do, I should not
object. But one always does. One can do oneself justice, perhaps, and no
one else can. Undoubtedly pride enters in here, but I hasten to disclaim
this (some more pride!) and say that it is the work and the ideas of the
work which are not presented correctly. Which is very true too.

If some aspects of my past life are brought out (the reformed sinner) I
should not object or even reply as to whether what is said is true or
not true. "We never get a lick amiss," my mother used to tell us when
she had slapped the wrong child in some family fray. So if I am blamed
for what I did not do, I have too often escaped blame for what I did do.

As for my daughter and her family being brought into it: if they
objected I would not write about them as I do in the pages of The
Catholic Worker. But they lead so retired a life, David with his job in
a factory and his tremendous library of distributist books and Tamar
with her children and her crafts (spinning, weaving, hooked rugs and
basket making this last winter), that such publicity only brings them a
sense of community with other families with similar ideas around the
country. There is a community of correspondence set up and so the good
life is furthered still more.

College Students
----------------

Then as to the people themselves with whom I work and with whom I live.
The recent Daily News article did speak of the hundreds of young people
from colleges all over the country who have kept coming to us over the
years for periods of three months to five or ten years. During the
Easter vacation there was Al Lingus from Chicago (now in the seminary)
who has spent summers with us. There is Frank Lakey, a member of the St.
Louis group of Catholic Workers, now in a prep seminary. There is
Frances Ferguson, 19, who came with a weekend case and a volume of
Donne's poetry. "I didn't write for fear you would not let me come." And
another young girl of 18 is coming soon. Mostly it has been young men
because they are freer to pick up and leave city and family and job.
"The News" wonders what they find with us. One way to explain it is to
remind people of the Quaker work camps which are made up of young people
working in centers in Europe, Mexico, South America, and here in this
country, among the poor, doing them some service, living with them,
eating as they do, learning from them while they try to give in exchange
some of their youth and strength. People come to the CW in the same way,
only not for a weekend, but for much longer periods. Some feel that they
wish to dedicate their lives to the work, or some aspect of it; others
are never sure, and stay on indefinitely, waiting for inspiration of the
Holy Spirit, or just "for something to turn up," like Micawber. Anyway,
they bring youth, beauty, stimulus and also their muscle and blood to
the movement. Also they bring an element of war, the war between worker
and scholar. The worker feels the "treason of the intellectual" and the
scholar does not understand the reserve and the criticism of the worker.
"But the workers must become scholars and the scholars workers." Peter
Maurin used to say.

Another thing, we would not be having so many young people coming to the
work, nor the steady cooperation of the workers if I were in any sense a
"boss" as the News said. I'm the mother of a family, it is true, so I
suppose there is some authoritarian aspect in my attitude. But everyone
knows how the children get around the mother. We don't believe in the
use of force, people voluntarily give their cooperation to the work, and
they do their job as they please, when they please. The one realm in
which I do have the last say, is the **Catholic Worker** itself. I do
choose what is to be published and what is to be left out. The mistakes
we make, I am responsible for, and many an editorial slip I have made,
many a mistake. We can just pick ourselves up and go on.

Derelicts
---------

The greatest misery of the newspaper articles however, for me and for
others, is the categorizing of our fellow workers as derelicts. In our
houses of hospitality we do not use the word bum or derelict. As little
Sheila Murphy, eldest child of Louis Murphy who heads the Detroit work,
said last I was there, "Bum is a bad word."

The Murphies live with the people they receive at the **St. Martha**
House and the **St. Francis** House. I brought up my own daughter with
those men and women who have been so categorized, and only yesterday
Tamar was remarking on what a sense of security she had as a child in
such a community as ours. (John Filliger, our farmer, used to take her
for rides on the horses and the hay wagon and she followed him and the
plough, even as her own children are doing now.)

We protest this attitude toward the poor, the poor in health, in mind
and body, the poor in bodily and spiritual goods. We have lived long
enough with them, (for we are now beginning our 24^th^ year) to realize
more and more that to love our brother is to love Christ in them, to see
and find Christ in them. "They knew Him in the breaking of bread." All
men are brothers. "Call no man Master for ye are all brothers," Jesus
Christ said. In reviewing my books on two occasions it was suggested
that mine was a perverse and morbid love of the gutter. On one occasion
I was called a Necrophiliac! But if you look for Christ you look for
Christ you will find Him; (seek and ye shall find) and we have found
Him, and found Him quickly, in the poor.

Fr. Regamey in his famous book POVERTY, said that Christ left Himself to
us in the Blessed Sacrament, in "when two or three are gathered together
in My name" (community) and in the poor, "inasmuch as ye have done it
unto these my least brethren, ye have done it unto Me. He has said these
things Himself, and He is Truth.

There is great talk about the Bowery these days and what to do with the
poor. Push them around until they get lost? There are suggestions of
turning Ellis Island into a vast shelter for the men of the Bowery. Here
is imprisonment indeed. Stay here, or else! I suppose that would mean
another island, Riker's island, where there is a prison for 5000 men,
most of them the poor.

This month I picked up two books, **Down and Out in Paris and London**,
by Orwell, and Tolstoi's **What to Do?** The beginning of the latter is
the discovery that in Moscow the man who begs is put into prison. That
discovery so shocked Leo Tolstoi that he began his book with a discussion
of how a man can be imprisoned for asking help from his brother in the
name of Christ. The Orwell book contains the terrible story of his
starvation in Paris and in London, and the jobs he held in Paris in
sub-basements of great hotels and restaurants which brought him enough
to eat but which also brought him work under such inhuman conditions
that it could be only considered a major cause for the dereliction of
all the men the authorities are discussing who live along the Bowery and
the Skid Rows of the country. Orwell discusses the lodging houses in
London with their common kitchens and the homeliness of such community
but there is also the unspeakable dirt and filth, and crowded conditions
so that it was impossible ever to get a good night's sleep. The
malnutrition after years of bread and tea, the lack of sleep, the
exhaustion attendant on just wandering around from pillar to post - -
all this graphically described by Orwell so that one would never forget
it. All these men who are in the Welfare Department should pick up this
book as required reading.

The conclusions Orwell comes to are my own. Provide many more, smaller,
cleaner and more comfortable lodging houses where men can sleep in
cubicles rather than in hordes or even with one or two others. A man
needs to be alone when he sleeps, Orwell says. God bless him for his
love and understanding of the poor, even though he never mentions the
word love. Provide them with enough decent food so that they are not
always hungry and thinking of food and drink. Forgive them seventy times
seven. A man has a natural right to food, clothing and shelter. Of
course they will fall again and again, as we all do in this life. The
just man, that is the holy man, falls seven times daily, scripture says.
But keep up this sort of treatment and you will see men working again,
finding work to do, if only the work, the honest work of keeping such
hostels going. Orwell also suggests rural hostels where the men could
work to grow their own food.

Peter Maurin used to say that a man should not have to work more than
four hours of manual labor a day, and that more hours should be spent in
study, in discussion, in doing the things he wants to do. When there is
a synthesis of Cult, Culture and Cultivation there beauty and peace and
truth spring up.

I have only to look around me as I write this article on the feast of
St. Benedict Joseph Labre, to see the illustration of what I am writing
about. Here at Peter Maurin farm we have a chapel, we have the Blessed
Sacrament. Those who choose come to pray the rosary and compline at
night. Half of them leave after the rosary. When we have Mass there, the
attendance is usually eighteen of our twenty-two residents. If only a
few came, there still would never be any questioning. In the realm of
religion, none is asked what he believes, no one is asked to
participate. But we have grace at meals of course. If you don't want to
say grace, come in a little later, or hang around in the hall outside
until it's over. Besides the city only the CW believes in such religious
freedom. The missions have services.

There is a good library of every kind of book from St. John of the Cross
to Agatha Chrystie! There is enough discussion of books at meal time to
constitute a course in the thinking of the day. The discussion of many
issues such as war and peace, man and the state, the racial problems of
the world, all can bring about intense discussion. There is some music,
when Hans Benning, or Hans Furth or someone who sings is visiting. We
have a recorder, too, and a good symphony library, and there is always
the radio. (No television here.)

There is sculpture rather than painting. There is Chris' crucifix, Eve
Smith's carving of our Lady and the children, Haig's Holy Family, Tina's
St. Joseph and the Blessed Mother. There is Rita's first piece of
stained glass, and Sister Prisca's of the crucifixion. She used to be
with the CW group in Rochester and is now at Regina Laudis. There is
Leonard making a loom and a potter's wheel, and Chris making a rear seat
contraption out of the trunk of the Mercury convertible recently given
us which reminds one of a pony cart and can hold five children. There is
the spinning and weaving and knitting and baking and cooking. Not to
speak of the collecting the children are always doing in the woods,
fields and sea shore.

Yes, all of us derelicts have a rich and beautiful life, this life of
voluntary poverty on the land. And as for us derelicts in the city, I
assure you there is no mission smell, no smell of disinfectants and if
there is the smell of the poor, it brought from the miserable lodging
houses which are like those Orwell describes in his book. It is not
native to our own House of Hospitality which is scrubbed freshly in the
morning and well aired what with the bread line, the clothes line, the
soup line and all the visitors coming in and out. It has dignity, that
old house, and it is painted clean. The\$25,000 - - that gigantic sum
which is the cause of our success story . . . is going to install our
sprinkler system and self closing doors, new stairs, etc. We have raised
that sum before, five years ago, to be exact, when we purchased the
place. And we have always tried to feed well, and keep a comfortable
home. After all, we are a community, a family, and God so loved us that
as the psalmist said, He considered us little less than the angels, not
as derelicts.

Well, everyone in the house sighs and says, "If it is saving the house,
and keeping the city from closing us down, let them call us what they
choose." But just the same, Houses of Hospitality are dealing with men,
temples of the Holy Ghost, men made to the image and likeness of God,
men made for happiness, and in our houses of hospitality, we are finding
it, together.
