% Clarification
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1957, 2.

*Summary: Responds to criticism of their refusal to participate in air
raid drills. Says they are rejecting the authority of the State to
compel men to war. Says "Self-suffering, non-resistance to evil, is an
alternative offered by the pacifist to the government, . . ." Keywords:
civil disobedience, pacifism (DDLW \#728).*

The comments made by some of our Catholic diocesan papers, while trying
to be both fair and kindly disposed, show only too often that we have
not made ourselves clear as to why we refused to obey the Civil Defense
law which made it obligatory for all toke shelter during the annual
civic defense drill, which refusal resulted in our going to jail. The
Catholic press was rebuked for its silence and seeming indifference to
the imprisonment of us twelve pacifists during July and August by
another diocesan newspaper – but I felt that we were to blame for not
having made our position clear.

Maybe it is impossible to clarify our stand. But we can at least try,
again and again. From the Dubuque Witness, a story was reprinted in
other papers, asking why, since the drill was to save life rather than
take it, did we refuse to take shelter? At the same time it criticized
what we had said. To them our explanations were muddled. "Given the
premise of pacifism one can understand why people picket the H. bomb
testing grounds. It is logical for a pacifist to refuse to pay taxes
that would go to buy armaments. But by any premise and in any system of
logic the civil disobedience of civil defense is – to use a mild
adjective instead of a deservedly severe one – irrelevant."

We thank them for their mildness, whoever wrote and printed this
editorial, and we will try again to explain what we did and why.

Albert Camus explains in his book **The Rebel**, how Marx, Hegel and
Nietzsche tore down the City of God and built up the State. All
revolutions have led to a reinforcement of the power of the State.
Truman in one of his speeches pointed out that we are truly now a
military state. We have peacetime conscription since 1939 and compulsory
registration. Now we have compulsory air raid drills.

We are rejecting this authority of the State, compelling men, and now
women and children, to take part in War games. "One might think that a
period which in a space of 50 years uproots, enslaves or kills seventy
million human beings should be condemned out of hand," writes Camus.

The nature of revoly has changed, he points out. It is no longer slave
against master, nor the poor against the rich. It is a metaphysical
revolt of man against the conditions of life. We explained that we
wished to do penance as Americans for our sins in being the first to
drop the atom bomb at Hiroshima. We also explained that such compulsory
participation in **War Games** was against our principles as pacifists
and conscientious objectors. (Indeed, for a woman, it is her only
opportunity to register her protest since she is not called upon to
register for the draft or to go to war). We had thought that these
explanations were sufficient. But Charles Butterworth, one of our staff,
put it more clearly today. **Self-suffering**, non-resistance to evil,
is an alternative offered by the pacifist to the government, setting an
example – an example which the government could follow, were it a
Christian government, in its relations with other states. If the
government followed the same technique of endurance and suffering, and
offered no resistance to the threatened bombing by another, it would be
the beginning of peace. It would call for a complete disarmament on the
part of the government. A wild, Utopian dream? But the Popes have said
that we could not expect one morality from the individual and another
from Governments. It is more than a question of counsel and precept. It
is a question of survival.

Together with this example of non-violent resistance, we do our positive
work, offer our positive example of combating at all times, poverty,
homelessness, hunger and prejudice, by the practice of the works of
mercy.
