% On Pilgrimage/Mixican Pilgrimage - February 1958
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1958, 1, 6.

*Summary: An account of a pilgrimage to Mexico to the shrine of Our Lady
of Guadalupe with a group from Minnesota. Highlights the faith of the
Mexican people in spite of a history of church persecution. (DDLW
\#734).*

Today is the feast of Sts Vincent and Anastasius, martyrs. In Saragossa,
Spain, in 304, Vincent was placed on a gridiron over burning coals. "God
tried them like gold in the furnace." Anastasius, a monk from Persia was
beheaded in 628 after suffering terrible torments. While burning on the
gridiron, Vincent exclaimed, "I thought your cruelty would go still
further." Anastasius also said, "I expected a more cruel kind of death."
Both died on the same day of the year, so their feast day is celebrated
together. This information is given at the beginning of the Mass, and it
is the kind of thing Ammon Hennacy delights in reading, and which he
says makes him feel like a "pip-squeak." Being only five or six years a
Catholic, the lives of the saints are new to him, who is used only to
the lives of the martyrs of the radical labor movement. He is not at all
bothered, as I used to be, at the emphasis on suffering, which I
uneasily used to think showed a spirit of masochism. Ammon always seems
to have known that man's "faith, more precious than gold, must be tried
as in the fire." "A servant must not be above his master, and if they
have persecuted me they must also persecute you," Our Lord said.
 
A strange thing is this faith of ours. "You do not enter Paradise
tomorrow or the day after, or in ten years," Leon Bloy wrote. "You enter
it today when you are poor and crucified."
 
I have just left a country where the people are poor and crucified.
They have, within our lifetime, suffered a religious persecution like
that of Russia, or like that of France only so recently as 1905, and
which the Church needs must undergo, if her faith is to be proven,--if
she is to walk in the footsteps of her Master.
 
I'd like to quote the whole of the Mass of this day, but lacking space,
I can only ask our readers to read in the book of Wisdom (Douay Bible)
Wisdom 3, 1- 8, and Luke 21, 9-19.
 
It all seems so clear, when you go to Communion each day and read the
Bible, receiving the word of God made Flesh and the word of God, in this
case presented in the missal.
 
Fr. Leo Neudecker invited me last year to make the pilgrimage with his
group from the Winona, Minnesota diocese, to the Shrine of Our Lady of
Guadalupe, but I was not able to go since I was in jail for five days
last January, for our civil disobedience gesture of two years ago. We
served our 30 day sentence for 1957 in August, and since if the drill is
held again this year and we refuse to take part we are in danger of
another sentence,
 
I was very happy to accept his invitation and join the fifteen members
of the pilgrimage at Kansas City and proceed by train to Mexico.
 
Fr. Neudecker has the true pilgrim spirit, sitting up all night in
uncomfortable, unheated dirty trains that stop at each small town all
through Mexico, and bringing with him cartons of good whole wheat bread
baked by himself. He will not like my reporting this, but he is one of
these young priests, and thank God there are many of them, who sleep on
boards, do without tea, coffee, tobacco, liquor, radio, television,
newspapers and magazines in a life which they do not consider at all
mortified. All these things which the world finds sweet, they find
bitterness, as Thomas a Kempis puts it. And living this right-side-up
life which the world considers upside-down, they get great joy out of it
and seem very happy men indeed.
 
I could write a separate article about the pilgrims, and perhaps I will
later, but I can only say here that they were all Minnesotans, of
different formerly European backgrounds, Poles, Czecho-Slovakians,
Germans, and so on, whose parents came to the middle west and lived
pioneers' lives, and progressed from sod houses to the latest in our
American culture of comfort. It was hard for them to understand the
poverty of the Mexicans. Who to blame it on, Spain, or the Church, or
the American imperialist or their own laziness? Wisely, they concluded
the matter was not so simple, and just wondered at how differently
people react to the challenges of life. One thing they wondered at and
marveled at, and that was the faith of the Mexican pilgrims who come by
the hundreds and thousands to the shrine, and to other shrines of
Mexico. Where we in the United States enjoy every other kind of outing,
the Mexican finds his joy in the pilgrimage. It is a nation of pilgrims.
As the Moslems go to Mecca, as the old tradition of Russia was to revere
the pilgrim, as the tradition in the East was to spend the latter third
of one's life in the search for God, so in Mexico, to make a yearly
pilgrimage, on foot, carrying banners, singing hymns, begging one's food
from village to village,--this seems to be the accepted vacation,
recreation, retreat, mission. Pilgrims go to offer supplication or
thanksgiving, to offer homage to God and the saints.
 
Coming to Mexico my first impressions were that the people put first
things first--God and religion, where it has survived the bitter
persecution of the Church which began with the Reform laws of 1857, and
was intensified under Calles in the 20's and continued in the 30's.
Graham Greene wrote about it in 1939.
 
Sad to say, there are huge areas where there are still no priests and
the churches have fallen into decay. The greatest problem of Mexico is
the need for priests (who cannot yet be ordained in Mexico) and for
catechists. But I will speak from now on of the great mass of religious
Mexicans, because those were the ones we saw, on pilgrimage as we were.
We saw the churches being rebuilt in town after town, and new churches
going up. Even one of our guides said that during those months of the
year when there was no work, he offered himself to the priest as a
laborer. "We have the earth, the adobe, the materials, and we give our
labor, and that is the greatest cost," he said. 
 
The great truth that dawned upon me as I travelled was that here, the
people themselves, with no particular leaders that stand out as Gandhi
or Vinoba Bhave stand out, standing against militarist leadership have
won, by their suffering, by their endurance, the religious freedom they
now have in abundance and which is still against the law on the books in
Mexico.
 
I saw the church in Coyoacan where Donald Demarest lives, where a
machine gun killed worshippers as they came from Mass, back in the 20's,
and young men were laid out dead on the plaza in front of the church to
deter other worshippers. I saw the tomb of Fr. Pro, Jesuit martyr, who
was a mechanic in a garage where he also conducted a seminary, who was
accused of being implicated in the death of Obregon, and was shot into
an open grave, with his brother suffering death at his side.
 
I saw churches made into restaurants and garages. I saw the priests
dressed in business suits and collar and tie. But I saw also on every
hand, the faith of the people. The people, the ordinary, common people!
There is a magnificent tribute paid them by Monsignor Guardini, in his
"The Church and the Catholic." The present Pope in one of his Christmas
addresses distinguishes between the *masses* and the *people*. The
Communist refers to the *masses,* which can be moved and swayed and used
in the tactic of class war. But the *people* are another matter.
 
The people, their work, their poverty, their endurance! They are close
to the soil, living in homes made of the soil around them, surrounded by
the ever changing mountains, at the time of our pilgrimage as brown as
the fields on every side, as the adobe huts, as the burros they rode, as
the roads they trod. "You cannot change the people," the guide said.
"They are like the hills. They will always be there."
 
It was in 1531 that Our Lady appeared to the Indian Juan Diego (his
Spanish name given him at his baptism.) There were not many Catholics
then among the Indians, and the treatment of the Spaniards who had
conquered them was not calculated to convert them very fast. If ever the
tension which always exists between church and state showed, it did
then, between the conquistadores and the padres who came with them to
bring the message of the gospel. The conquistadors were hungry for gold
and silver which was mined in great abundance. We still saw the mines
operating around Guanajuato, and saw too the Indians sieving the soil
for gold and silver in the dry river beds on the way to Guanajuato from
San Luis Potosi. Much gold was sent back to Spain and the brothers of
St. Teresa of Avila sent her gold too to help build her convents. They
too were in search of their fortune. It was under Archbishop Zumarrago
that the vision of the Blessed Mother appeared to the poor Indian by the
side of the hill of Tepeyac, asking that a shrine, a temple, be built
there in her honor. It was as though she were discontented with the way
Constantine had brought about the conversion of the pagans of Europe.
She was going to bring it about in her own way. She appeared in the
guise of an Indian maiden, young and beautiful, surrounded by rays of
gold, clad in a white and gold embroidered dress, covered by a blue
star-studded robe, standing on a half- moon, borne aloft by an angel,
her hands folded together in prayer. She told Juan that she came because
she loved the Indian and wished to protect him. She came as an Indian
maiden, as Indian as Katherine Tekakwitha of the Iroquois, and she came
to them, not to the Spaniards. She came as one of the colored peoples of
the world, to a colored people and unlike her history in other shrines,
she left them a memento of herself. When the archbishop demanded proof
that Juan Diego's story was not just imagination, and he told our Lady,
she commanded him to pick some miraculous Castilian roses which bloomed
at her word on the barren hill and carry them in his tilma, his cloak,
woven of the maguey fiber, and show them to the archbishop. When he did
this, and emptied his tilma at the feet of the prelate, the Spaniard
fell on his knees before the Indian holding up the tilma, on which had
appeared the likeness of our Lady of Guadalupe. This same story is told
of Veronica's veil, on which the face of Christ was imprinted, and our
Lady used this precedent to give herself to the Indians, not only of
Mexico, but of all the Americas, of our own United States as well as
Mexico, Central and South America.
 
And of all the representations of the blessed Mother of Christ, this to
me is the most beautiful. 
 
After that occurrence, the Indians were converted by the tens of
thousands.
 
"We have the answer to the problem of color which confronts the East
and the West," Archbishop Miranda, primate of Mexico said to us in an
interview on the last day. "Our Lady answered it then. There is no
problem in Mexico. Where there was the Indian, there is now the Mexican.
There is a new people, a new race. There was intermarriage from the
first."
 
Archbishop Miranda certainly understood the power of non- violence. He
told us of interviews he had in Europe with repatriated priests and nuns
who had been imprisoned with the millions in Siberian labor camps. "And
they want to go back," he said. "They feel that there is a fruitful
field for conversion. There the people are eager for faith."
 
The Russians consider themselves not only Europeans but also Asiatics.
Perhaps it is from this their Messianic idea comes. The Mexicans many of
them look as though they had come over from Asia, over the Aleutian
Islands, down through Alaska and along the coast to Mexico.
 
The Archbishop told us of the increasing number of pilgrimages that
were coming to Mexico from every state in the United States as well as
Mexico to visit the shrine of our Lady of Guadalupe and to venerate the
picture on the tilma which hangs behind the high altar in the Basilica.
 
I am always conscious when I write, of the many non-Catholics who read
the CATHOLIC WORKER and who are averse to such veneration. I can only
point out with St. Augustine that the flesh of Jesus is the flesh of
Mary, that He took his humanity from her. And call attention to that
greeting of Elizabeth, "Blessed art thou amongst women!"
 
God means us to use material things as aids. He clothed the sacraments
with bread and wine, with water, with oil, with the accompaniments of
all beauty of ritual, music, color, odor of flowers and beeswax and
incense. The Indians too say, "With this body I thee worship," coming on
their knees to the shrine, singing hymns to El Senor, in lamentation and
petition, in joy and thanksgiving. They come with their centavos and
their pesos, and buy candles and flowers for an odor of sweetness and
they touch the images, the representations of our Lord in all the phases
of His agony and death, and in the shrines of the Holy Family, at the
manger, in flight to Egypt, at work, and so on. And they kneel before
the picture of our Lady by the hour.
 
We paid many visits to the shrine and never ceased to marvel the people
and their faith and devotion. Sunday, after a morning at the shrine
where the church and the square in front of it were literally so crowded
with pilgrims that it was hard to move, we went in the afternoon to the
pyramids and what a contrast this visit was! There were no pilgrims, few
tourists, only some picnickers in this archeological park. There were
idols but no altars, and there are not even many settlements near this
vast place which was formerly a temple for human sacrifice. Our guides
told us about the legends of Quetzalcoatl, the blond blue-eyed man who
came from the sea and was considered a god. He foretold a time would
come when they would be conquered by a people from the sea. We saw the
pyramids of the Sun and of the moon, and the great temple and its
carving of serpents and gods. And now the sun god is replaced by the Sun
of Justice, and the moon god by Our Lady of Guadalupe, and the god of
rain and agriculture by our Saint Isador, patron of farmers, and all our
galaxy of saints.
 
What vast ruins and what great cultures have peen destroyed, but the
everlasting hills remain and the people close to the earth as they are,
continue to live to know God, to love Him and serve Him, their first
beginning and their last end.
 
I was thinking today how our pilgrims all come from Minnesota, a state
abounding in Indian names of towns, but where are the Indians now? Fr.
Leo pointed out to us the contrast between what we English did to the
Indians and what the Spanish did. The Indians are still here, thirty
million of them, and the country is theirs and the church is theirs,
poor as they are. Our Indians have been robbed and all but exterminated,
neither converted nor allowed to live under their own religions. First
put on reservations, they are now being evicted and sent into the cities
to be assimilated, to find employment and social security or idleness
and dissipation. As to our treatment of the Mexicans in the States, the
articles Ted Le Berthon has been writing for *The Catholic
Worker* clearly show how we must examine our consciences.
 
Another time I must tell the story of Larry Blum who was one of four
pilgrims who came from America, and stayed to make a 21 day pilgrimage
with eighty Mexicans to the shrine of St. Juan de los Lagos, and met a
young Mexican catechist and married her here.
