% Review of 'Autobiography of St. Therese of Lisieux'
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1958, 4.

*Summary: Comments on a new translation of St. Therese's autobiography
and the controversy over certain passages. Shays she has had a "constant
reading about and thinking about Therese these last ten years." (DDLW
\#743).*


AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF ST. THERESE OF LISTEUX, translated by Monsignor Ronald
Knox. Published by P. J. Kenedy and Sons. \$4.50. Reviewed by Dorothy
Day

Here at last is the translation from the original note book of St.
Therese sixty years after her death, and even now according to Msgr.
Vernon Johnson in the introduction, the erasor had been used so
liberally, there had been so much rewriting done by Therese herself, by
Pauline (Mother Agnes) by the saint's own permission, that even all the
means used by science to restore the original were in vain.

We will not really know the Saint until she reveals herself to us. We
must be content, if any devotee of this most attractive of modern saints
can ever be satisfied, with Monsignor Knox's translation, his last work
of love before his death last year. I myself am delighted with the
fresh, joyful spontaneity of style, the spirit of the book which
flowing, animated, humorous, profound. I am not going to compare Therese
to Nietche, Dostoievsky, St. Thomas and St. Augustine as some modern
intellectuals are doing. She is herself, unique. Perhaps the translation
does not answer all my questions. There are passages in the Taylor
translation (from Pauline's version) that do not appear in the Knox
translation. Did Pauline write in these passages? There is one where
Therese's nervous illness is described. In Pauline's version, nails in
the wall (and what were nails doing in the wall of a model home?)
appeared as gnarled fingers and her father's hat as a monster on his
knee. These lines are not in the Knox translation. On the other hand the
passage about Mother Marie de Gonzague's harshness to Therese at the
beginning of her life in Carmel do not appear in the French notebooks
according to Fr. Robot who reviewed in 3 articles the new translation in
the London Catholic Herald. Fr. Robot has himself written a book which
is full of spleen, so venomous is his criticism. He does not hesitate to
accuse Pauline of lying, in and out of the confessional, and there is an
implied criticism of Msgr. Knox in his letter to the Herald.

With my constant reading about and thinking about Therese these last ten
years, I owe a debt of thanks to Abbe Combes whose writings also
published by Kenedy, are full of the exact translation from Therese's
own note books which Carmel made available to him. This new translation,
the books by Abbe Combes, and the*Story of a Family* by Piat, are
invaluable to those who have chosen Therese as their spiritual guide. We
are deeply grateful to the publishers for bringing them to us.
