% On Pilgrimage - June 1959
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1959, 1, 6.

*Summary: Struggles with "the dumps", finding new quarters and car
troubles oin her way to Vermont to visit Tamar and her family. Graphic
description of life at their farm. Ponders how to promote religious
expression in a busy family. (DDLW \#752).*

The last issue of the Catholic Worker, the April-May issue, came out
while Deane Mowrer and I were in the Woman's House of Detention. She
covers the story in this issue of the paper, and I shall write more on
it later. Looking over my diary in which there are large gaps I find
that part of the time since my last On Pilgrimage, was taken up by
sickness, an attack of the flu, the kind that leaves one very
melancholy, dull-witted and down in the dumps. My mother used to say
that the best cure for melancholy was to clean house, take a bath, get
dressed up and go buy a new hat. St. Teresa of Avila is supposed to have
fed her nuns steak when they were weakened by melancholy. My cure in
this case was Dickens. I reread "David Copperfield." My confusion of
mind might have been increased by reading Charles Williams' "The Greater
Trumps." But there was a splendid quotation which helped me greatly, on
page 143.

"… When her brother had remarked that she seemed mopey she had been shocked… by a sense of her own disloyalty since she believed enjoyment to be a debt which every man owes to his fellows, partly for its own sake, partly lest he at all diminish their own precarious hold on it. She attempted dutifully to enjoy and failed, but while she attempted it the true gift was delivered into her hands."

Joy in this sense is used as C.S. Lewis uses it in "Surprised by
Joy," and as Bernanos meant it in his novel Joy.

My own gloom was caused not only by illness but also by the impending
air raid drill. Making the Stations of the Cross overcame that. Abbot
Marmion says one gets an increase of fortitude while making the
stations. I prayed for fortitude and joy.

My prayers were answered all right because I had a perfectly happy time
in jail. The Image Book, **Teresa of Avila**, helped in this. Monsignor
McCafferty brought me a copy of this and it was so good and exciting
that Deane and I took turns reading it.

The Line
--------

We have been looking for other quarters and spent much time and thought
on one building on the Bowery, which turned out to be too small to take
care of our office and kitchen both, and would mean increased expense;
and then on another building on Houston Street which is being torn up
and widened at that point. When we asked city officials if there was any
prospect of the building coming down soon, they replied that "as of this
**moment**" there are plans for that side of the street. But by a
consensus of opinion those stores and apartments which made up the
building were considered unsuitable by our group, so we will content
ourselves with St. Joseph's Loft on Spring Street until we are forced
out. The problem is the **line** and the hostility of the neighbors
which is not yet overcome. Right now we are only feeding the "house."
Our windows have been broken, some panes in every window and one can
only think of that story of St. Francis, "**This then is perfect joy.**"
We are still housing people in scattered apartments and at the Jeanne
d'Arc Residence. My mention of that brought me a delightful letter from
a woman who came many years ago from Europe and stayed with the Sisters
there for some years, and wanted very much to join their order but was
rejected, much to her disappointment. She was very happy there she said,
as those of us who stayed there have been happy.

Staten Island
-------------

We are settled, as much as we can be settled anywhere, on Staten Island,
and we are making plans to build there if we can get a permit. But the
latest news is that our neighborhood is zoned and we can build only one
or two family houses. If we decide to do this we will build a two-family
house with bedrooms for twelve children! What are we coming to when
there are so many restrictions laid down. We keep trying to work things
out as a voluntary association of people, a group living together and
trying to perform the works of mercy.

Visit to Tamar
--------------

Early this month I had an engagement at Bard College which is almost a
hundred miles from Staten Island. It is on the way to Vermont, and since
I wanted to bring Tamar some boxes of clothes for the children I
borrowed the farm car and drove up the West shore of the Hudson to
Kingston and then across the river to the school which is a hundred
years old and is now termed by some a "progressive" college, and
described by another as like St. John's at Annapolis except that they
went in opposite directions. I do not know what they mean, but I learned
that there are about 250 students, it is coeducational, there is one
faculty member for every seven students, that they study by the seminar
plan and the students love the place. It is very expensive. It costs
about \$2300 a year to go there.

I stayed the night at the home of the professor of sociology, Dr. de
Gre, went to Mass the next morning, Ascension Day, at Barrytown and then
set out on route nine to meet route 23 into Great Barrington. Route
seven brought me to Manchester, Vermont, and then over Bromley mountain,
where the car boiled over and made whistling noises like a teakettle. We
rested for a time on the mountain side while I said the rosary, and then
fortified with Hail Mary's I got to the top of the hill where a kindly
man cooled off the car for me with a hose and advised me to have the
thermostat checked. I learned much by all the disasters that happen to
our cars. I have had the battery drop out to the ground, the old style
clutch come off in my hand, the gas pedal go down through the floor and
many other such breakdowns, but ever since seeing the movie, **Grapes of
Wrath,** which showed migrants in their old trucks crossing deserts and
mountains, I have never worried.

I got lost on the back roads around Perkinsville because the power
company was working on the lines on Weathersfield Road which leads up to
the Hennessey farm. But I got there by supper time. It was a good time
to arrive because a neighbor had just finished ploughing, spreading
manure and harrowing the garden patch, with David and the children
assisting and the joy and excitement had been intense. It was truly
spring, and the weather from then on for the four day weekend was hot
and still.

They had a full day, that Ascension day–up for a six-thirty Mass in
Springfield where the parish church is, then on to Chester to buy feed
and get the 25 baby chicks offered with every hundred pounds. They had a
full load coming back, eight children, 75 chicks, and feed, but "they
made it," as Nickie says jubilantly, and the five older children were
dropped off at the four-room schoolhouse in Perkinsville and the rest
brought home to settle the chicks in the room over the barn. All during
the day Martha kept going around clutching one of the tiny black
roosters to her breast. Little chicks always seem to live through these
adventures.

Hilaire had howled when his mother and father went to communion. The
family had to go in two batches to the communion rail. Not much chance
for feelings of devotion with a squirming, restless 20-month-old baby
but what an act of faith, what will to offer worship to God, what real
desire to receive Him!

Tamar will fatten the cockerels to a certain age and then they will be
put in the deep freeze. Her hens are giving plenty of eggs, so many that
she sells some. There is an abundance of home made butter too, some of
which she sells.

I slept in Becky's room and she moved into the attic room next to it and
the sun poured in and we were awakened early, she to do her lessons and
me to read the Psalms in the little oblate manual which is so handy to
travel with.

During the next two days there was some planting done, onion sets, peas
and potatoes, and we took a walk up a steep mountain road alongside of
which a brook ran merrily. I brought home an apron full of the shoots of
fiddle back ferns to be cooked for supper. They taste like fresh
asparagus. The only difficulty was that half the heavy fuzz which
protects the tender shoot got left on and tasted like bits of cotton! We
had fried parsnips for supper too, dug fresh out of the garden after
they had been left in the ground all winter. The kale which they hoped
to have in the spring had been eaten by wild things about.

Saturday morning Tamar took the five oldest to catechism which lasts all
morning, and David and I sat out in the sun talking about books and
publishers--city talk. But in the oven in the house a big ham from the
family pig was roasting for Sunday dinner, and for lunch there had been
pancakes made with milk, eggs and butter, with maple sugar from their
own trees. It was a bad sap year, he said, and they had made only six
gallons, but for each six gallons, thirty gallons of sap had to be
gathered from the woods, and it had been a job, sliding down icy paths
and much of it being spilled.

The boys were fishing every spare moment, and I had a good pan of brook
trout before I left. Nickie is always telling of the dozen he caught,
all of which were too small and had to be thrown back. But Eric and he
always bring fish home.

By the side of the kitchen door the crimson tulips, narcissus,
daffodils, pansies and grape hyacinths were in bloom and in the woods
red trillium, little yellow lilies and many varieties of violet are in
bloom. The fold upon fold of hills are many shades of blue, violet and
green above the sky is the clearest blue. The only sounds are the stream
coming down from Weathersfield Center and the wind in the trees and the
cow bells on the hillside, the clucking of a dozen or so brown hens, and
the occasional song of a bird.

I fed the little ones their applesauce and peanut butter sandwiches on
the porch, and tried to describe all the beauties around us to the
children in terms of God the creator. \
"Isn't God good to give us all these things?" I said from my own deep
sense of thankfulness, and little Maggie said firmly, "I like God," and
Martha echoed, "I like God, too!"

Remembering how often the comment is made that one must love one's
neighbor but not necessarily "like" him, I was well satisfied with their
comment.

When Tamar was growing up I used to lament the passing of each year,
each stage, "Now she is no longer an infant, now she is no longer a
two-year-old." But with the big family, there is the fascination of all
the ages.

And how beautiful young mothers are and how more relaxed the mother of
the large family who knows more or less what to expect of each year.
During the month I spoke at Easthampton where our friends the Whalens
and the Konceliks live on a pinewooded hill overlooking a bay. They each
have nine children and there too one finds that wonderful sense of
purpose and fulfillment.

Religion in the home
--------------------

The problem of religious expression in the home is one that bothers many
parents of large families. St. Benedict's rule, short prayers but
frequently, is a good one. When it comes time to recitation of the
rosary, it certainly seems to me better to recite a decade reverently
rather than five in a mad and distracted race, a babbling with one eye
on the littlest ones climbing in and out of bed. The morning offering,
grace at meals, remembrance of saint's days, the liturgical season, --
the atmosphere of faith, these are the necessary things. And most of
all, to pray one's self, in season and out of season, without ceasing.

The older I get the more I realize how little we can do without backing
up teaching by such prayer. The peace and calm of knowing that our Lord
can change people and the course of events in the twinkling of an eye
certainly saves one a lot of discouragement and worry.

This last issue of *Worship* has an article on Confirmation which should
be reprinted and given for study to every parent. There was a quotation
which I copied in my diary which filled me with hope and joy.

"We must never forget that grace follows its own laws--different from those of natural psychology; and that even in natural life, spiritual maturity does not coincide with physical maturity. As St. Thomas says it would all be a dangerous materialization of grace to submit the Holy Spirit to the laws of the body, Child saints are the most beautiful proof of this." The article is by Boniface X. Luykx, O. Praem.

