% On Pilgrimage - July 1959
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July 1959, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: Vivid description of being transported in vans to court after
arrest for civil disobedience. Deplores the conditions at the women's
house of detention. Notes similar conditions for migrant workers.
Delights in visitors, guests and her reading. Keywords: jail, prison
(DDLW \#753).*

In response to the article "Prison Revisited," by Deane Mower, in the
last issue of **The Catholic Worker,** we received the following letter:
(addressed to 22 Chrystie St. instead of 39 Spring St.)

Dear sir: I wish to express commendation of the article PRISON REVISITED
in the June issue of your paper. We always welcome fair criticism. We
are at all times ready to receive suggestions for improved procedures.

I was particularly impressed by the complaint about bologna sandwiches
on a Friday. A check of this was instituted and report received from the
Deputy Warden in charge of the pens, copy of which is herewith attached.
Yours very sincerely, ANNA M. CROSS.

> REPORT: From: Commanding Officer, Court Detention Pens Manhattan
>
> To: Correction Commissioner (thru channels)
>
> Subject: Article in The Catholic Worker re: Dorothy Day
>
>1. Dorothy Day was received in our pens at Felony Court Manhattan
> Friday, April 24, 1959, Sentenced to \$25 or ten days workhouse for
> violation 101-2 State Emergency act by Magistrate Roe.
>
> 2. In an article appearing in The Catholic Worker this prisoner
> claims she was given a bologna sandwich which she unintentionally ate
> without any thought of it being Friday, a day â€“ which people of Roman
> Catholic faith are to fast from eating meat.
>
> 3. Correction Officer Ramon Caccarale, Shield No. 836, assigned to
> kitchen at the Manhattan House of Detention for Men which supplies
> food for lunch to our court pens stated he inspects food before
> sending it here, and he never sends sandwiches containing meat on a
> Friday to the pens: instead of meat he generally substitutes jelly.
>
> 4. However, rules of the Roman Catholic faith are "when in an
> institution there is no choice of menu the rule of fast is not
> enforced, and is regarded as not committing any breach of the rules or
> regulations of the Church."
>
> Joseph T. Casey
>
> Deputy Warden in Command Court Detention Pens. Manhattan.

When Deane read this letter she suggested that they thought I had taken
the nom de plume of Deane Mowrer!

We are not going to prolong this correspondence, but find it necessary
to correct it. We hope they have changed our address on their files. We
never lived at 22 Chrystie St. and 223 has been torn down. It was Deane
who wrote the very good article which will probably be included in some
sociology reader together with other of our CW articles.

But we insist we **did** have bologna sandwiches in the pen. (We are
delighted that they use this term,-- that they admit to herding us human
beings into "pens" like animals.) As to who was guilty, it might have
been the Woman's House of Detention, because before the girls go from
the detention floors to trial, they are each given a sandwich nicely
wrapped, and the Manhattan court detention officers hand out the tea. Or
perhaps sometimes it is the one and sometimes the other. Anyway,
wrapped, and the Manhattan court detention officers hand out the tea. Or
perhaps sometimes it is the one and sometimes the other. Anyway, Deane
called attention to it, after we had eaten, but none of us minded; our
conscience did not bother us. Bob Steed who is very rigid about such
things, also Stanley Vishnewsky and Charles Butterworth probably would
not have eaten the sandwich, and of course not Ammon, that staunch
vegetarian. But it has been many many years now that I sit down to a
table, measuring the amount of food there is and the number to be
served, always wondering whether there is enough to go around and
praying the Lord to stretch it. So I gratefully eat whatever there is
without question.

Other Criticism
---------------

Deane's article only mentioned the meat in passing. This comment took up
two sentences in a long article which filled five columns. I should like
to add a few criticisms.

First of all, -- to criticize the pens on wheels, the vans, which take
the prisoner to the jails. Please, dear readers, when you see one pass
you on the street, pray for the poor human beings shut up inside that
foul pen. One kindly officer who kept lamenting several years ago that
he loves us and yet he had to be the one to arrest us, told me to sit
away up close to the driver's seat and I would be less jolted. "Hang on
to the spare tire stored there," he advised. Only once did I have the
opportunity to do this. Usually women are confined to a tiny pen in the
back of the van, the forward part of which is for men. You are locked in
and on many occasions the men are handcuffed to one another. I remember
peering out of the slits at the top of the compartment at the back, to
see Dan O'Hagen trying with his handcuffed hands to wrap his coat about
a poor shivering prisonder who was evidently having a chill brought on
by withdrawal from drugs. To see these men treated like wild beasts
touched me to the heart.

This ride in the van is to be dreaded more than anything else.
Regardless of age or condition, and one year there was a pregnant woman
with us, and every year I have suffered from arthritic pains, we are all
herded into this steel pen, where with nothing to grab hold on, we are
tossed from side to side, hitting the ceiling on some occasions as the
police van speeds from lower Manhattan to the uptown court at the other
end of the island. Sentenced from there, it is another long ride down
town. The only thing I can compare it to is the punishment in the fairy
tales, -- the wicked stepmother and step sisters being put in a nail
studded barrel and rolled down a mountain.

If I believed in bringing suits against the city, I would do it for the
sake of all the other women who have to submit to this ride. It is cruel
and inhuman punishment and more to be dreaded than the trial itself. At
least for me it was sheer agony.

This year, thanks to the fact that three adolescents (young college men
under twenty one) were arrested with us, we were tried in the adolescent
court in lower Manhattan, and there were not these terrifying rides. And
the day we were brought from jail to the court for trial (we spent five
days because we would not pay bail) we went to court in a bus like any
other bus with springs and regular seats. At the moment of arrest, when
the all clear signal had sounded, we were even treated to the luxury of
driving to the Elizabeth street station in one of the Civil Defense
official cars; but that was because a young woman and her two children
had been arrested with us. They were released, so our next ride was in a
van.

Other Criticisms
----------------

We need to repeat, again and again and again, that overcrowding of the
detained and the sentence, and lack of work, for the 300 women detained
for trial, the presence of adolescents in a prison filled with women who
are repeaters, all these serious criticisms are ignored. The lack of any
treatment for drug addicts as criminals instead of as patients (though
of course drug addiction leads to crime) is another criticism, though
the **New York Times** carries a story this month of the probable
opening of wards in several hospitals in New York for addicts.

We can only regard the attention paid to a casual remark about a bologna
sandwich as a perverse sense of humor on the part of the Department of
Correction officials who took it up. Are they playing with us? Are they
being sarcastic, sneering at the seriousness of our criticisms? Are
these matters to be laughed at? There are slum conditions indeed, in the
Women's House of Detention in the richest city in the world.

Up to the present time we have felt that Anna Cross, Commissioner of
Correction, was making noble efforts to chance conditions for the women.
But this particular letter is an example of tithing mint and cumin.

Migrant Workers
---------------

There was a terrible story last month of sixteen Mexicans burned to
death as the truck they were being driven to work in, rammed a tree.
Thirty-two more were seriously injured. The driver, another Mexican,
told the highway patrol that he had dozed at the wheel.

Some of the chapters in Ammon Hennacy's autobiography tells of his
riding in just such trucks to the fields to harvest carrots or
cauliflower or cotton. The corner where the trucks gather up their
laborers is called the slave market. At dawn these ramshackle converted
closed-in busses are heavily loaded. The passengers can never see where
they are going. They are driven such long distances that in this case, a
water barrel blocked the only exit. These workers were on their way to
garlic fields and for many of them in was their last day's work before
they returned to Mexico.

Migrant Family
--------------

We have an American family staying in one of our beach bungalows. They
have worked in the packing sheds of the onion fields in Arizona, being
paid so much a dozen for tying bunches of onions. They arrived by car
one day in June with a very sick child with a high temperature. There
are five children and they have all been through a siege of measles and
flu. We are happy indeed that we have a place on the beach for them to
rest up after their cross-country trip. They are an intelligent and
literate family and we are enjoying their visit.

Fritz Eichenberg
----------------

An Italian dinner with Fritz Eichenberg one evening. They were
having good stew at the house, but we went out in order to visit and
talk. At St. Joseph's loft there are too many interruptions, especially
after I have been in Staten Island for a few weeks. Every one in the
very large Catholic Worker family wants to visit too. And everyone who
comes into the office wants to meet Fritz. We just had a letter that
very day from a man and his wife who wrote, "we cannot repay you for the
wonderful friends met and articles enjoyed through The Catholic Worker.
Eichenberg alone is beyond price."

I forgot to tell him about this so I do it now publicly.

He in turn told me about a wonderful artist from Japan, Shiko Munakata
who at present has a gallery in his own name at 46^th^ St., between
Fifth and Sixth Avenues where his incomparable woodcuts are being shown
this month. Fritz described him, his incredible speed in working, his
amazing effects of script and picture, the color effects over the black
and white. He has an interpreter and in addition to his work sessions at
Pratt Institute, he stops to lecture and tell wonderful folk tales and
legends, laughing with joy, so filled with happiness that every one must
laugh with him. He sounds like someone completely alive, and filled with
the joy of creation. Someone who is truly, in his capacity as creator,
made in the image and likeness of God.

Indian Doctor
-------------

The next night going back to Staten Island, I sat on the ferry boat and
read in **The New Yorker** an account of an Indian doctor who performed
tens of thousands of operations all over India for cataracts and other
troubles of the eye. His name is Dr. Muragapa Chenavirapa Modi and he is
41 years old. He makes no charge for his work. It is financed by
philanthropic organizations and by the government. He was asked why he
travelled over such a vast territory, an area of 300,000 square miles.
He began, he said, in a private hospital but when he found that his
patients sold their homes or their cows, to pay the fare to get to him,
"I saw that I would have to go to them to keep them from selling
everything they had," he said. He carries about fifteen assistants with
him and they set up camps for their patients. There are two million
totally blind and six million partially blind in India.

Another remark he made astounded me. "I am not interested in religion;
it is a walking stick and once you have learned to walk you have no need
of a stick. Service to the suffering human body, which is the temple of
God, is the best form of worshipping God. I take much pleasure in this
service."

I could not help but think of St. James saying: "Pure religion and
undefiled before God is to visit the widowless and fatherless in their
afflictions and keep oneself unspotted from the world."

It seems to us his is pure religion, when he confesses that he is
dealing with God's temples.

A heroine
---------

Another happy encounter during the month was the paperback book. "The
Inn of the Sixth Happiness," by Alan Burgess, originally published by
Dutton as "The Small Woman" in 1957 and reprinted by the Christian
Herald, Concordia Book Club, Lutheran Book Club and Reader's Digest. And
of course familiar to people who frequent the movies. The story of this
heroine in China, travelling through far mountain regions to bring the
story of Jesus to the ends of the earth, and gathering up many little
orphans on the way, -- this is a great adventure indeed. It is a true
story, and well told.

We count ourselves rich to have had these encounters this month, with
Shiko Munakata, Dr. Muragapa Chenavirapa Modi and Gladys Aylward, the
missionary.

At this moment we are all breathing a sigh of relief: the crisis about
Charles Butterworth has passed, and though he was sentenced to six
months on both charges, of harboring a fugitive and helping him to
escape, Judge Noonan suspended the sentences. When Ammon went to get the
judge's signature for the release of the bail, he said he saw a statue
of the Blessed Mother in his office. The Judge also said that his son
read **The Catholic Worker** each month.

Trip Postponed
--------------

I had intended to go to the west coast to speak at some Quaker work
camps the last days of June and the first of July, but the date of the
retreat, which I had been looking forward to was set for the same time,
and my spiritual director said that the retreat came first. How good it
is to have some one settle such a matter. I had felt quite torn between
the two engagements. The retreat is for those interested in the
spiritual family of Father Charles de Foucauld and is being given by Fr.
Brennan who teaches Scripture at St. Bernard's Seminary in Rochester,
New York.

There will be more about this in a later issue. "Seeds of the Desert,"
by Fr. Rene Voillaume, published by Fides Press, is made up of
conferences given to the Little Brothers of Jesus, and is the best
spiritual reading for our time that I have come across. Fr. Charles
(Jack English), Trappist at Conyers, Ga., translated some additional
conferences for me from the French and we have been passing them around
to our friends.

I am hoping to go to the west coast in October so that I may fill some
of the engagements I missed this June.


