% On Pilgrimage - November 1961
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1961, 2, 8.

*Summary: Laments that schools take up too much of children's time,
depriving mothers "help from her community." Urges reading, especially
the scriptures, the psalms in particular. Is encouraged that the
encyclical Mater et Magistra encourages cooperatives. Thinks the U.S.
policy toward Cuba is counterproductive. (DDLW \#787).*

May God bless those who have done us good and helped feed and shelter
all those who come to us each month. We haven't begun to thank all who
answered our Fall appeal. Several of the young fellows around the place
have been busy writing acknowledgements, and there are many of the
letters which I wish to answer personally, so I stack them all in a
drawer in my desk, and do some every day. If people who write me
personally do not hear from me at once, please excuse it and know that I
do enjoy writing letters and will answer during the coming month when I
will be staying home instead of doing so much speaking.

Fr. McSorley of the Paulists told me once that I should go where I was
invited so this last month I have spoken at six colleges, one graduate
school (Putney), at the Meeting School at Rindge, New Hampshire, at a
Unitarian Church, to two groups of the Christian Family movement, to
some Young Christian Workers, to a Serra [sic] Club and to a Newman
Club, and at a communion breakfast of an Altar and Rosary society. It
was a crowded month of going and coming, around the East, and at the
beginning and end of it I had the joy of visiting my daughter and
grandchildren in Vermont.

While there I was examining Nickie's catechism book in which he was
supposed to write answers to questions at the end of the chapter
studied. He wrote about **Atom** and Eve being put out of the garden of
Eden, and to the question as to when did God make man, he answered
succinctly "Last." And why love God? "Because He made me."

I continue to think that children are overcrowded with homework and have
too long hours in school. Tamar's children leave at seven-fifteen in the
morning (the boys getting up early to bring in the wood and milk the cow
and put the cow, heifer and steer into the field). They get home at
four-fifteen and have to sit down to homework. Eric, thirteen, was
tearing his hair over a paper he was required to write, five thousand
words on mental health! The four older children spend hours looking up
things in the encyclopedia and in written homework and book reports.

Certainly children do not have much time to be part of the home under
our present school system. The public and parochial schools both claim
all the waking hours of children. Friday night is given over to studying
catechism, Saturday morning is given over to catechism classes and
Sunday morning to Mass. Which leaves Saturday afternoon for a football
game and Sunday afternoon for more homework. Which leaves a mother of
nine children with very little help from her community. In spite of this
schedule however, Sue will get a batch of bread in the oven and help
with the supper and Becky will iron dresses for the five girls going to
school. But life is too much of a rush even in the country.

Reading
-------

St. Jerome wrote, "Let sleep creep over you holding a book, and let the
sacred page receive your drooping face."

"Reading is the oil that keeps the lamp burning." With the guidance of a
priest some of the young people in town have had Scripture classes last
month. Abbe Bouyer's "Meaning of Scripture" is a wonderful introduction
to the Bible. When I spoke at St. Anselm's, Mary Perkins Ryan gave me
her latest translation of his work "Introduction to Spirituality," in
page proofs and I am looking forward to reading that. Notre Dame Univ.
press brings out his work.

In these days of almost hysterical fear of war and annihilation it is
good to read the psalms morning and evening in the Short Breviary
obtainable from the Liturgical Press, Collegeville, Minn., and nearer
home, Fr. Frey's psalm book which contains all the psalms as given in
the big breviary for each day in the week. It is a small purse size
book, and reading these prayers of the Church, one is praying with the
Church and obtaining that confidence in God and His care of us that
makes for a peaceful heart.

Again we have no article from Ammon, but next month we will have some
book reviews from his pen. Many have complained at the lack of book
reviews lately, and reminded us of the splendid work of Betty Bartelme
and Beth Rogers keeping us up on the great output of our Catholic press.
And Judith Gregory will review Lillian Smith's **Killer of the Dream**.

Mater and Magister
------------------

We want also to print excerpts from the Holy Father's latest great
encyclical. "Within the confines of subsidiarity," writes Fr. John F.
Cronin, S.S., "it allows for much social experimentation. There is a
deep optimism in the Pope's approach."

"We are all equally responsible for the undernourished peoples," the
Pope writes. "The solidarity which binds all men and makes them members
of the same family imposes upon political communities enjoying abundance
of material goods not to remain indifferent to those political
communities whose citizens suffer from poverty, misery and hunger and
who lack even the elementary rights of the human person.

"Therefore it is necessary to educate one's conscience to the sense of
responsibility which weighs upon each and everyone especially upon those
who are more blessed with this world's goods."

He warns against imposing our culture on others and takes up the problem
of population growth, and he talks of the "noxious fruits of
isolationism, colonial exploitation and economic imperialism."

He calls for worker participation, asking that workers "be able to
participate in the ownership of the enterprise itself." He urges that
small business and firms consisting of craftsmen should be protected and
encouraged, and cooperatives build up. "The warm papal endorsement of
cooperatives is particularly significant since previous social
encyclicals and addresses did not give much attention to this form of
enterprise," according to Fr. Cronin.

The Paulist Press, 180 Varick St., New York 14, has issued a very good
edition of this encyclical which deserves our thorough study. There is
much about rural life, and our agricultural problems which our Catholic
landowners in California would do well to study.

Cuba
----

I received two letter from friends in Cuba this last month, and hope to
be able to write to some of the priests there. Sidney Lenz has a long
article in the November issue of **Fellowship**, thirty cents a copy,
Nyack, New York. This is the second article he has written and he traces
the progress of the revolution, and the growth of communist power. After
a long article filled with praise for the accomplishments of the
revolution which remains basically humanist and continues being a
**Communist revolution led by non-Communists**, he writes, "The Cuban
revolution is clearly at a turning point. If the United States were to
reestablish diplomatic relations and even a minimum of trade, it is
certain that the dogmatic influences would decline rapidly. If President
Kennedy really wanted to strike a blow at Communism, one prominent Cuban
writer, also disturbed by the situation, told me, 'He could do it in ten
minutes by reopening his embassy here. The Communists would fight it and
lose ground. Fidel would agree to it immediately and undercut them.
After all, we can remain friendly to Russia without a Communist movement
internally. Nasser has done it. So have others.'

"To the extent that the United States continues its embargo and
political offensive, the dangers within Cuba intensify. We as a nation
have it within our hands, even now, to strengthen the most important
humanist revolution in Latin American history. We can also by our vulgar
and sterile anti-communism, help the Cuban Communists win the greatest
victory possible--to take over a revolution they opposed, from the hands
of the non-communists who made it."
