% On Pilgrimage - June 1964
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1964, 1, 2, 6.

*Summary: Recalls visiting the Oratory in Birmingham, England and the
life of St. Philip Neri who founded the Oratory in Rome. Stories about
money--ill spent tax dollars to alleviate the heavy traffic in their
neighborhood, the windfall they received from selling their Staten
Island property, capital gains taxes, and fees to lawyers and real
estate agents. Explains how they used the windfall to acquire a new farm
at Tivoli. (DDLW \#816).*

I have been reading Fr. Bouyer's **Life of Newman** for some months now
and have gotten to the part where Newman and his little band are
starting the Oratory in Birmingham, England. I visited there last Fall,
when I went to England to speak at Spode House, the Dominican Retreat
center near Birmingham. Canon Drinkwater who had visited us in New York
obtained a car and chauffeur and drove us to these hallowed spots, holy
to me because of their association with Newman. The writings of Cardinal
Newman were introduced to me by Father John J. Hugo of Pittsburgh,
himself in a way, another Newman struggling against the inertia, apathy,
and even corruption of his own day.

The Oratory
---

St. Philip Neri, who founded the Oratory in Rome, was born in Florence
in 1515, the same year as St. Teresa of Avila, in Spain, and he lived
all his life in Rome. He was one of the most influential persons of his
time. According to my missal, "he was a man of original character and
happy disposition. He had a great love of God and of people of all
conditions. He lived as a pilgrim touring the streets of Rome for
fifteen years, exerting powerful influence on many people. At 36 he was
ordained a priest. He gathered around him about 20 priests who formed
the congregation of secular priests of the Oratory."

One of the things I remember reading about St. Philip Neri is how he
knelt in the window of his Rome dwelling and looking out over the city
prayed for it. Ever since reading that, I have followed that practice,
and enjoy it. I do this because I am half the week in New York, and half
the week in Tivoli at our new farm.

The City
---

We have three women's apartments on Kenmare Street in New York and they
are full, with cots which can be set up in the kitchen for extra and
unexpected guests.

My front corner room looks down over the crossroads of Mott and Kenmare
and receives the morning sun and plenty of breezes which dispel to some
extent the fumes from the traffic outside. Kenmare St. leads directly
east to the Williamsburg Bridge and west to the Holland tunnel, and of
course the traffic is enormous. Perhaps the new Verranzano Bridge, with
its cross-Staten Island expressway to Goethels Bridge leading to New
Jersey will handle this traffic when the new Bridge is completed this
year. But our city fathers are still trying to get the go ahead signal
to demolish our neighborhood in favor of a cross-Manhattan expressway to
handle the traffic problem. There is ninety million dollars involved, to
be put up by the Federal government, to the city's ten, and this great
sum will not lightly be relinquished. If it only could be put into
better housing for the poor of the East side! Housing where there are no
automatic lifts, where murder, rape and other violence have been
committed, where there are enough community servants to man the
elevators, halls, the playgrounds and work as recreation directors and
camp leaders and exploration guides to siphon off the unemployed youth
hungry for movement, hungry to satisfy their curiosity about the world
around them. (We know one such leader in Springfield, Vermont where my
daughter lives, who has a science club and takes the members all over
the state to visit factories, powerplants, museums or to climb
mountains.)

But no, there is money for arms and for traffic but not for the poor and
unemployed, - - nothing for youth!

Last night I sat at my window and watched the world passing by, trucks
from all over the country, and where is Marianna, Florida? Trucks laden
with furniture, lumber, animals, sacks of saw dust, potato chips, fruit
and vegetables, gasoline, milk, cement, cane syrup, garments, lowing
cattle. There was an occasional horse and wagon, noisy on the
cobblestones which pave the street. There are traffic lights on each
corner so there is the shifting of gears, the roar of motors. When the
traffic flows uninterrupted, there is the clatter and the bounce and the
jangle of empty trucks over uneven pavement. There are police cars,
police ambulances, fire trucks, chartered busses going to and from the
World's Fair. There are trucks gathering up waste fats from all the
butcher shops around to bring to soap factories in Brooklyn. There are
sanitation department trucks that make a noise like an air raid siren as
they grind up the boxes and furniture and tin cans and garbage collected
daily from all the battered ash cans which stand in rows in front of
each tenement. And there are people bringing down bundles of trash to
push into these already crowded cans, old women marketing with their
shopping bags, young women pushing baby carriages, still other young
women in stretch pants, pink pants, purple pants, green pants, orange
pants. Clothes hanging from fire escape to window on short lines,
crowded together. Bed clothes airing on window sills.

We have lived long in this neighborhood, Mott Street, Spring Street,
Chrystie Street; all our ten apartments are in this section where
Chinese, Puerto Rican, Negro, Italian, Jew - - all Americans, live in
comparative peace. We all feel safe here in this radius surrounding the
Bowery because we know each other and are known. To a certain extent,
that is.

On the other hand, the Daily News features each day scenes of violence
and crime, all the tragedies which are taking place among six million or
eight million or more people. This ceaseless news of violence repeated
every hour, on the hour, on radio, and then dished up again with
pictures when the Daily News comes out in the night, builds up the fear
which is growing up in our midst, a fear almost deliberately stirred up
by the press, which makes whites fear Negroes and the rich the poor, and
one neighborhood another. There is wild talk of people arming
themselves, first tear gas pencils are suggested, and now guns! Are the
newspapers building up to rioting like that of the Know Nothings in the
last century? I write these things because I believe that each one of us
participates in building up an atmosphere, - - whether it is of fear or
of the love which casts out fear.

Tivoli
---

One of the letters which came in this morning was from a Holy Cross
Brother who writes that thirty years or more ago he was Boys' Director
of what was the Leake and Watts Farm School, a branch school of their
larger home in Yonkers. He went on to say that he thought this same
property which we purchased was ideal for us and is looking forward to
reading more about it.

One of the questions that has been asked was "How did you find it?" It
was by reading the real estate ads in the New York Times. Once realizing
that we were selling the entire farm at Staten Island, though we thought
at first we were selling only some acreage which we did not use and
which had brought up our taxes to astronomical figures, I set out to
look for a place. We had thought of selling part and keeping house and
barn and gardens. But there was trouble with the fire department for
having a chapel in the barn. We had no permit, they said. There was
trouble with the building department who said we could not put up a fire
escape on a wooden dwelling. We did it anyway, risking a fine of \$250.
New England and Canada are filled with wooden houses with outdoor
stairways. The building department also told us we could have only one
family and four extra people in the house. If there were no family
brood, one person would count as a family. Which would mean only five
people. I hesitated to write about this idiotic interpretation of the
law in our regard since I continued to break it. But what a relief to
get away from such harassment. How easy it is to understand the grief of
the small landlord and store keeper and businessman in this day of
corporations with their corporation lawyers.

Another reason for our moving was the sudden realization that we were
going to get a large amount of money for our sale of the property. This
was shocking not only to us, but to our friends. To think that we were
going to "make money" in this speculative fashion - - there was
something immoral about it. There was the capital gains tax. Were we
going to pay it, the twenty five per cent which goes to the federal
government and which in turn goes for "defense" and moon shots, and the
making of poison gas and all kinds of fearful missiles? A certain amount
of course goes for the upkeep of our huge veterans hospitals where the
wrecks left over from former wars are cared for or kept in dead storage.
A certain amount goes also for "foreign aid" which usually means too our
occupation of territory for missile bases, and for alliances. Not much
money is given without strings attached.

The thing to do was not only to rejoice in our windfall but to spend it
as quickly as possible. I certainly felt that God, our Father, who is a
personal God, a personal Father, who sees our needs, who foresees the
means we must have to do the kind of work we envision, directly
intervened here.

We could have inherited money or unencumbered property. No one would
have objected to this. I could have written a best seller, perhaps. The
fact of the matter was that we were caught in a land boom. A piece of
property which we paid $16,000 for could be sold for $175,000. This
was the prospect before us.

The sum before we were through all the negotiations was whittled down to
a smaller amount. First of all there was a payment of $25,000 on the
signing of the contract almost a year ago. Five thousand of that went to
a lawyer who was extricating us from a mistake which would have
permitted another speculator to have the property on a ten year mortgage
with a comparatively small down payment and "no interest." Charles
Butterworth and I were sued for seventy thousand dollars and five
thousand dollars or delivery of the property, which suits dragged on for
months until they were dealt with out of court on the payment of fifteen
thousand dollar settlement. I felt this was theft on the part of the
unscrupulous real estate dealer, but "business is business."

Actually $12,000 was contributed by a new buyer. We paid $3,000 to the
first dealer and three thousand to the first agent. Which made six
thousand less on the $175,000 offered. The twenty thousand left over
after the initial payment to the lawyer went to pay an accumulation of
bills which had plagued the CW family for some time. It costs us a
thousand dollars a month in rents in the city and another seventy
thousand or more dollars a year to keep our two large households going
in city and country which means the total support of sixty people, not
counting our breadline and the daily petty cash outlay which is anything
but petty.

The new farm, which comprises sixty-five acres cost $78,000 and a nine
passenger International Harvester station wagon will set us back another
three thousand five hundred. We sold the mortgage at an eighteen percent
discount which lops off another ten thousand or more. But we have no
interest to pay and interest to take and since we sold the mortgage to
the very people, a family which bought the place, we are not putting
them in the position of paying interest. But we have not converted them
by any means from the desire to make money on the Staten Island property
by chopping it up into lots and building on it houses similar to a
greater or lesser degree to those you see advertised in other
developments to sell for $19,999 with a long term mortgage which will
all but double the price. Indeed, one buyer of such a house once said to
me that the house he was buying would fall apart before he had the
mortgage paid off. These jokes one sees portrayed in cartoons where the
all of one apartment collapses when leaned against to show some young
couple at table, or some young lady in the tub, are an indication of
what is happening in the building line. A grim joke indeed.

I have not all the figures handy, but what with penalties, fees to two
agents, discounts and so on, not to speak of our purchasing our new home
for cash, there will remain enough of the money to pay all debts and to
get through the summer on.

Tivoli
---

For a time we wondered what to call the new place which boasted of three
buildings. The old de Peyster mansion which is at present uninhabitable
aside from two little apartments built into it for summer guests, will
eventually be repaired. On one great cornerstone the words **Beata
Maria** were chiseled and on another **Watts**, the names of two of the
de Peyster children evidently. So we thought at first of calling the
place **Beata Maria**, as we had called the farm at Easton. That was too
hard for many of our readers and visitors to remember, so we decided to
call the whole place, the **Catholic Worker Farm**; the first old school
house, the **Peter Maurin House**; the second **Beata Maria**, and the
third house in which we are living, **St. Joseph's**. Catholic Worker
Farm at Tivoli, New York, will be our address.

Originally there had been the mansion of one of the river barons, then
the stables were remodeled into the school dormitory building where our
Holy Cross correspondent worked over thirty years ago.

The school building was used and so was the mansion. We have already
started the library and chapel in the Peter Maurin House. And in St.
Joseph's house, everyone from Peter Maurin Farm and from the beach
houses are by now almost moved in. Stanley has set up his press in one
dusty room of the mansion; and the two apartments will be occupied by
Lorraine and her sons and a professor from Purdue and his wife and
children who are coming to help us get started this summer.

Past History
---

After the school no longer functioned at Tivoli, the land army took over
during the second world war, and again the dormitories were used by
young people who worked in the crops up down the Hudson valley. Then I
understand the Jehovah's Witnesses took over and ran the place as a camp
and farm for a time. The last owner was John Mastrion and his family,
who ran the place as a resort for families and the place was beautifully
built up with new roof, rooms for families, big dining room and kitchen,
recreation room and swimming pool.

When I read the ad in the New York Times, it said "suitable for a
religious group" and since they mentioned three houses I thought that
here would be room to grow and to house the groups that came to us for
discussion and retreat so many times during the year.

The fact that the Good Friday over a year ago had seen two hundred young
people descending on Peter Maurin farm to spend the day and night before
going on with their pilgrimage to the United Nations; and that the Labor
Day week end crowd was made up of one hundred and forty peace workers,
made me the more convinced that this was something we needed. So after
visits in December and January, and actually no visits to any other
places, a down payment was made and then all we had to do was to wait to
get the money in hand to complete the purchase. In the spring Mr.
Mastrion, his son and some of his relatives came and put in a new boiler
in the main house and started it to working, and stayed to show us how
to operate the pool, the pump and the reservoir. He and his family had
been coming up summers for the past eight or nine years and they were
sorry to leave the place, but the father, for whom the place had
originally been purchased, had died, and so the family wished to
concentrate their work in the Sheepshead Bay area where they lived and
the New York city area where John Mastrion worked in construction. We
found him generous and cooperative to a degree, and are intensely
grateful to the family for all the loving work they put into this
project not only when they themselves were the owners, but for us, to
get us started up there. I told them when they left us, when their work
was finished, that I would be remembering them when we said our nightly
rosary and compline together. And they assured us they would remember us
too.

This is not too complete an account and is written with many
interruptions and distractions and again we beg our readers to excuse us
for long delaying the answering of letters. During the course of our
moving from the Peter Maurin Farm, the beach houses, and some folk from
the city also to the land - -the transferring of files, past and
present, trays of mail, answered and unanswered and to be filed, - - all
have gotten into an awful hodge podge and a lot of sorting out of papers
will have to take place. But on the one hand, Marquette University
Library is receiving our archives. If they are not already discouraged
at the masses of material they have received, we can ship a lot more off
to them. And on the other hand, I am reading a delightful book,
**Maryknoll's First Lady**, by Sister Jeanne Marie, published by Dodd
Mead and Company and learning about all the hard beginnings and paper
work they had to do, and so am less discouraged at not having been more
successful even after thirty years in getting our own files in order.
Will we ever, undisciplined laymen as we are, be any more orderly? Just
now some students came in, and after an hour with them, I must stir up
my desk still more to find some lost sheets and articles to go off to
the printer. It is the same with Tom Cornell, with Martin Corbin, with
all editors of wide interests, it would seem. Humans and books and
papers are inextricably mixed up.

Let us hope that this is our last move, in the rural area at least.
Stanley, the Melancholy Slav says that doubtless the state will decide
some day to put a Throughway along the river. But I doubt it.
Expressways and urban renewal may mean other moves in the city but we
will be in our same district, God willing, for many years to come.
