% Father Milani R. I. P.
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1967, 1, 5.

*Summary: Mourns the death of Don Lorenzo Milani, an Italian parish
priest who was a staunch defender of conscientious objection to war for
Italians. (DDLW \#854).*

Don Lorenzo Milani is dead--in his early forties, of leukemia, and we
mourn his passing.
 
His was a mountain parish, in Barbiana, Italy. When he arrived there,
there was only one elementary school of five grades to serve the
community, five classes in one schoolroom. He made up his mind to teach
the boys of the village who "grew up shy and despised." For the last
twelve years of his life he devoted himself to a group of boys who lived
with him. "We receive guests in common. We read together, books, papers,
the mail. We write together."
 
One day a friend dropped in to bring Don Lorenzo a newspaper clipping,
entitled, "A communique by the retired military chaplains of the region
of Tuscany," which asserted that the action of the thirty-one Italian
boys in jail because they were conscientious objectors to war, was
"foreign to the Christian commandment to love, and an expression of
cowardice." It was afterwards learned that only twenty out of the
hundred and twenty members of that organization were present when the
communique was read.
 
Fr. Milani responded with an open letter in reply to the military
chaplains which was sent to a thousand people -- priests, bishops and
political leaders. The letter was published in several Italian papers
including a communist paper, and when it appeared Fr. Milani was brought
into court together with the editor of the Communist paper. For the
first hearing of the case, Fr. Milani wrote a long letter of defense,
since he was too sick to appear at the hearing. The letter was printed
in the January, 1966 issue of the Catholic Worker, and also in full in
pamphlet form by the War Resisters League (in which a historical outline
of Italy's wars was included.) Even in its abbreviated form it took
twelve columns of that issue, which also included Jim Wilson's statement
on the works of war and the works of mercy, illustrated by Rita Corbin's
five-column picture. We hope that the War Resisters League, 5 Beekman
St., New York, still has a supply of this pamphlet which so movingly
shows us Don Milani's great-hearted efforts not only to defend
conscientious objectors but also to teach the youth around him how to
work for a better world.
 
We must pray for more humble parish priests, the like of Don Lorenzo
Milani. God grant him a place of refreshment, light and peace.
