% On Pilgrimage - December 1967
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1967, 2, 6.

*Summary: Reports on Catholic Worker participation in demonstrations in
New York and at the Pentagon against the draft. Says they refrain when
participants repudiate non-violence, which they practice. Says we have
to pray from deliverance from fear of our enemies. Gives details of her
visit to England, the many friends met and groups visited. Went on a
pilgrimage and had speaking engagements. (DDLW \#858).*

One of the outstanding things about the Catholic Worker I always feel is
that everyone around the place is seeking love, is seeking God, whether
they are articulate about it or not. Fr. de Lubac says you cannot go
wrong if you are on the side of the poor, and the volunteers who come to
us are so absorbed in the work around St. Joseph's House, 175 Chrystie
Street, that they have no time to write for **The Catholic Worker**.
They are expressing themselves in deeds, not words, and are well
content. What with meals to get, cooking to do, the hungry to feed, the
naked to clothe, the sick to visit at Bellevue, and then of course the
paper to mail out each month, they put in a long day and part of the
night.

No Reports
----------

Consequently we get no reports of the demonstrations they also find time
to go on. Right now George Amrhein is down at Whitehall Street lost
among the thousands there, and I'm praying he does not come back with a
cracked head or a bruised back. Only yesterday Conor Cruise O'Brien, a
brilliant writer and critic of modern literature, was injured by kicks
from a policeman. Others were injured in the attempt which was being
made to block entrance to the induction center near the Battery. It is a
week of protests and the fervor is mounting to turn the protest into
resistance and resistance into more active forms of interference. With
threats of violence the police are afraid, and thousands of extra
policemen are doing extra duty.

The Catholic Worker has participated in the Monday and Tuesday
demonstrations which emphasized non-violence, but when some others of
the forty-two organizations which make up the **Stop the Draft Week
Committee** repudiate non-violence, we cannot go along with them. George
is there as an observer.

Washington Demonstration
------------------------

When it came to the October 21 demonstration in front of the Pentagon in
Washington, Chris Kearns drove fifteen participants, including two
children, to and from Washington. Nicole d'Entremont, Tom Hoey, George
Amrhein, and Mary Kae Josh were there. Tom and Mary Kae actually were
the first to sit down rather than let themselves be pressed back by the
military police.

I got some flavor of the Washington affair from Mary Kae this morning,
over breakfast.

She hated the shouting and the cursing, she said. It was right and
necessary to take to the streets and demonstrate, but to do so with
anger and contempt for police or soldier was neither right nor
effective. She told me how bitterly cold it was and how someone loaned
her an overcoat which came clear to the ground. The vigil went on all
night and the inactivity made it a time of real suffering. She told me
of a conversation she had with a young MP who told her there was nothing
he would rather be doing than sitting in a warm place looking at TV or
reading the paper. She found out in further conversation that he wanted
to go into his medical studies but was drafted before he could begin.

As Mary Kae told me these things, I could picture to myself a little
island of peace and fellowship in the midst of the thousands of
participants, and I hoped there were many more of them. It is a time
when a great deal of praying needs to be done, and I am sure that even
those who would scoff at the idea, and I have heard these scoffs often
enough, are glad of the prayers. Hate is a lonely thing. It is one thing
to hate evil, but people are people, brothers and sisters, with one
common Father. One of the prayers I say often is that verse from the
psalms which begs God to deliver us from the **fear** of our enemies. It
is fear itself that engenders hatred and violence. We have to transcend
fear and seek and find another source of that energy which gives us
strength to love, to grow in love.

The Catholic Worker never seems to go under its own banner, most of the
groups being made up of personalists, shall we say, rather than rugged
individualists. Perhaps we ought to go with banners. Marty Corbin says
perhaps we should identify ourselves. I do know that we should have an
inquiring reporter around the place, to piece stories together that
should have been written by the actors therein.

I Was Away
----------

Meanwhile it seemed to me I was at the other end of the world, yet still
a part of the Catholic Worker family, even a spokesman for it. On the
boat going over, I spoke to the freshman class of seminarians on their
way to the American seminary in Rome, and later in Rome itself I spoke
to young ordained priests who were remaining at the **Casa**, as it is
called, on Humility Street, as someone termed the street of Our Lady of
Humility.

In England
----------

In London it was good to see Peter Lumsden again, who is earning his
living "charring" and teaching people to drive in order to get out of
paying taxes for armaments. Earning little and living poor is one of the
things Ammon Hennacy taught all the young men who came under his
influence. Unfortunately there are many who admire him but do not
imitate him in his self-discipline.

At one of the PAX meetings held in London, Archbishop Roberts had to
leave early, although he was the speaker of the evening, so it fell to
my lot to fill in. There were three PAX meetings, two in London and one
at Spode House, where I met Father Herbert McCabe, O.P., whose removal
from the editorship of **New Blackfriars** caused such a stir in
England, along with his brother Bernard and his wife with their seven
children. Father Conrad Pepler is warden of Spode House, where weekend
seminars are conducted the year around. These Dominican centers (there
are others in London, Cambridge and Oxford) are the centers of Catholic
intellectual life, it seems to me. We have learned much from both French
and English Dominicans.

When I was in London I also spoke at Fr. Vincent McNabb Hall. It was one
of Father Vincent McNabb's pamphlets that Peter Maurin gave me when I
first met him in 1932, an essay called "Nazareth or Social Chaos."
Father McNabb used to speak in Hyde Park and he continued this activity
to within a few weeks of his death some years ago.

Walter Stein, who teaches at Leeds University, was a most stimulating
speaker at the Spode House conference, as was Bernard McCabe. I write
this now with no notes at hand and cannot do justice to all who
participated.

Other dear friends whom I saw on my visit were Barbara Wall, Margaret
Maison, and Emily Scarborough Coleman, who has been living at the
Hermitage, a guest house connected with Stanbrook Abbey. Here at this
famous Benedictine House I spoke to the nuns, seventy of them, all very
much alive and alert to what is going on in the world today. An American
novice there promised us one of her woodcuts for the **CW**, and we are
looking forward to its arrival. The Abbey is a center of intellectual as
well as religious life.

London
------

In London Eileen Egan and I stayed at the Hotel Gresham, right around
the corner from the British Museum. Anthony Allison, one of the members
of PAX, works at the Museum and got us reader's tickets, so that we
spent some mornings there, in a most favorable atmosphere for work,
since one could relieve the strain of reading or writing by wandering
around that part of the museum which is given over to works of art and
of antiquity.

Charles Thompson and John O'Connor met us at the airport, and found us a
place to stay, which turned out to be a most interesting guest house
with many student helpers. The manager and owner was an Irishman who
said that he came from a family of ten children, only one of whom his
parents could afford to educate. So he got his education by reading;
among his favorite authors were Dostoievsky and James Joyce. He made us
most comfortable and when I was suffering from a cold he brought me a
hot-water bottle, cold tablets and hot tea. Most comforting. Part of the
time the hotel was filled with exotic foreign guests and one day with a
crowd of trade unionists attending a nearby conference. The television
room was filled with discussion about everything that was happening in
the world, and the worst at that time seemed to be the devaluation of
the pound. "The worst thing since Dunkirk," we heard, "though people
don't realize it yet."

Simon Community
---------------

One morning two young women with their babies arrived to take me to
visit one of the houses of the Simon Community. It had been a Catholic
Worker House of Hospitality during World War II and the refuge of many
exiles. Now it is one of a chain of houses started by Anton
Wallich-Clifford, a former Royal Air Force man who had afterwards been a
parole officer. His work, he told me at one of the PAX meetings, had
been inspired by Father Borelli of Naples, the Franciscans of Wiltshire
and the Catholic Worker. The house on Malden Road was very much like a
Catholic Worker house, a narrow three-story affair, with small rooms and
a small kitchen and out in back a long garden which showed evidence of
having been cared for but was filled in one place with heaps of plaster
and rubble.

"Every time the garden is cleaned up another ceiling falls down" one of
the men in the house said. He had introduced himself to us as a Digger
and left to dress himself up in beads and blanket to further identify
himself.

There is a training center at Canterbury and I would have liked to visit
that, but my time was limited. It was Ann Power and Susie Moroney who
had come for me that morning and they told me of a cooperative venture
the two families were about to engage in: a house outside of London for
their growing families. Jonathan and Ann Power had spent six months with
Martin Luther King in Chicago some time ago, had taught for two years in
Tanzania, and were filled with admiration for President Julius Nyerere
and his brand of socialism, which sounds to me like the communitarian
socialism of Martin Buber's **Paths in Utopia**. Jonathan is an
economist and Bob Moroney is a teacher.

The story of Taena Community, a few other visits I made to **Catholic
Worker** readers, and a little pilgrimage I made to Haworth and the home
of the Brontes will conclude my account of my visit to England, but
there is neither time nor space to write it now. As it is, I never feel
that I have done justice to the dear friends and the loving kindness
they showed us.
