% Our Country Passes from Undeclared War to Declared War; We Continue Our Christian Pacifist Stand
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1942, 1,4.

*Summary: A month after Pearl Harbor she reaffirms the gospel basis of
pacifism. Says she will not be carping in her criticism of our country
but refuses to participate in war. Recommends constant prayer, the works
of mercy, and mutual forbearance in disagreements. (DDLW \#868).*

DEAR FELLOW WORKERS IN CHRIST:

Lord God, merciful God, our Father, shall we keep silent, or shall we
speak? And if we speak, what shall we say?

I am sitting here in the church on Mott Street writing this in your
presence. Out on the streets it is quiet, but you are there too, in the
Chinese, in the Italians, these neighbors we love. We love them because
they are our brothers, as Christ is our Brother and God our Father.

But we have forgotten so much. We have all forgotten. And how can we
know unless you tell us. "For whoever calls upon the name of the Lord
shall be saved." How then are they to call upon Him in whom they have
not believed? But how are they to believe Him whom they have not heard?
And how are they to hear, if no one preaches? And how are men to preach
unless they be sent? As it is written, "How beautiful are the feet of
those who preach the gospel of peace." (Romans X)

Seventy-five thousand Catholic Workers go out every month. What shall we
print? We can print still what the Holy Father is saying, when he speaks
of total war, of mitigating the horrors of war, when he speaks of cities
of refuge, of feeding Europe....

We will print the words of Christ who is with us always, even to the end
of the world. "Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, and
pray for those who persecute and calumniate you, so that you may be
children of your Father in heaven, who makes His sun to rise on the good
and the evil, and sends rain on the just and unjust."

We are at war, a declared war, with Japan, Germany and Italy. But still
we can repeat Christ's words, each day, holding them close in our
hearts, each month printing them in the paper. In times past, Europe has
been a battlefield. But let us remember St. Francis, who spoke of peace
and we will remind our readers of him, too, so they will not forget.

In The Catholic Worker we will quote our Pope, our saints, our priests.
We will go on printing the articles which remind us today that we are
all "called to be saints," that we are other Christs, reminding us of
the priesthood of the laity.

We are still pacifists. Our manifesto is the Sermon on the Mount, which
means that we will try to be peacemakers. Speaking for many of our
conscientious objectors, we will not participate in armed warfare or in
making munitions, or by buying government bonds to prosecute the war, or
in urging others to these efforts.

But neither will we be carping in our criticism. We love our country and
we love our President. We have been the only country in the world where
men of all nations have taken refuge from oppression. We recognize that
while in the order of intention we have tried to stand for peace, for
love of our brother, in the order of execution we have failed as
Americans in living up to our principles.

We will try daily, hourly, to pray for an end to the war, such an end,
to quote Father Orchard, "as would manifest to all the world, that it
was brought about by divine action, rather than by military might or
diplomatic negotiation, which men and nations would then only attribute
to their power or sagacity."

"Despite all calls to prayer," Father Orchard concludes, "there is at
present all too little indication anywhere that the tragedy of humanity
and the desperate need of the world have moved the faithful, still less
stirred the thoughtless masses, to turn to prayer as the only hope for
mankind this dreadful hour.

"We shall never pray until we feel more deeply, and we shall never feel
deeply enough until we envisage what is actually happening in the world,
and understand what is possible in the will of God; and that means until
sufficient numbers realize that we have brought things to a pass which
is beyond human power to help or save.

"Those who do feel and see, however inadequately, should not hesitate
to begin to pray, or fail to persevere, however dark the prospects
remain. "Let them urge others to do likewise; and then, first small
groups, and then the Church as a whole, and at last the world, may turn
and cry for forgiveness, mercy and deliverance for all.

"Then we may be sure God will answer, and effectually; for the Lord's
hand is not shortened that it cannot save, nor His ear heavy that it
cannot hear." Let us add, that unless we combine this prayer with
almsgiving, in giving to the least of God's children, and fasting in
order that we may help feed the hungry, and penance in recognition of
our share in the guilt, our prayer may become empty words.

Our works of mercy may take us into the midst of war. As editor of The
Catholic Worker, I would urge our friends and associates to care for the
sick and the wounded, to the growing of food for the hungry, to the
continuance of all our works of mercy in our houses and on our farms. We
understand, of course, that there is and that there will be great
differences of opinion even among our own groups as to how much
collaboration we can have with the government in times like these. There
are differences more profound and there will be many continuing to work
with us from necessity, or from choice, who do not agree with us as to
our position on war, conscientious objection, etc. But we beg that there
will be mutual charity and forbearance among us all.

This letter, sent to all our Houses of Hospitality and to all our farms,
and being printed in the January issue of the paper, is to state our
position in this most difficult time.

Because of our refusal to assist in the prosecution of war and our
insistence that our collaboration be one for peace, we may find
ourselves in difficulties. But we trust in the generosity and
understanding of our government and our friends, to permit us to
continue, to use our paper to "preach Christ crucified."

May the Blessed Mary, Mother of love, of faith, of knowledge and of
hope, pray for us.
