% On Pilgrimage - February 1969
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1969, pp. 2,5

*Summary: Highlights the struggle and despair of the times, recounts a
conversation on faith with Mike Gold, an old Communist friend.
Discourses on penance and voluntary suffering as acts of love that
increase hope. Says we each have unique vocations to the works of mercy.
(DDLW \#894).*

Reading is the oil that keeps the lamp burning, the Fathers of the
Church wrote. So I recommend the Peace Calendar, Readings for the
Centenary of Gandhi's birth, edited by Mark Morris and put out by the
War Resisters League, 5 Beekman Street, New York, N.Y. 10038. Martin
Luther King's books, most of them in paperback, always inspire one with
the hope, faith and love to continue the daily struggle.

We certainly must^^have the long view into the future to see and realize
the awakening of the masses of people throughout the world and the
growth of a new vision among them of a world which is personalist and
communitarian. **The great problem is: what means are to be used?**

Thank God we are not living in that time when Africa was divided between
all the European powers, and England, France and Holland dominated the
Far East, when nobody knew or cared that their comfort in the West was
built on the blood, sweat, and tears of toilers of the world.

The battle at home now is to conquer the bitterness, the sense of
futility and despair that grows among the young and turns them to
violence, a violence which is magnified by the press, the radio and
television. We lose sight of the poor people's cooperatives and
boycotts, the conquest of bread, as Kropotkin called it, which goes on
daily in Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, not to speak of California,
Texas, and all the states where Mexicans have been imported for
agricultural labor. They have come into our cities too, so that "workers
and peasants" have united In the struggle and the story of the grape
pickers' nonviolent long drawn out battle has reached Canada and the
shores of Sweden and Finland, where dock workers have refused to unload
the grapes picked by scab labor in California. Our own government, our
enemy the State, has become the instrument of the growers in buying up
the grapes and shipping them overseas to the troops in Vietnam.

The work of unionization, the formation of credit unions and
cooperatives, especially cooperative housing, must go on, as must the
work of building up hope and a sense in men of their own capacity for
change, and for bringing about change.

The only thing that keeps hope alive is work, and study must go with it,
to keep one's hope and vision alive.

Faith
-----

I was talking to Mike Gold, my old Communist friend, when he returned
from France with his wife and two sons years ago. Our Christian-Marxist
dialogue went like this:

"My sons are named Karl and Nicholas," he reminded me as we spoke of his
children and my grandchildren.

"My second grandson is called Nicholas too."

"But mine is named after a different person than yours. Mine is named
after Lenin.

"Mine after the saint by that name and the Nicholases in Russia are too,
though they may not know it."

So I stopped the argument, having had the last word, by inviting him
over, and he brought me a present, a picture of St. Anne, from Brittany,
carefully rolled in a newspaper, so that it was flat for framing. While
we stood in the Catholic Worker kitchen and talked the dialogue
continued:

I said: "How hard it is to have faith in men when we see their racist
attitudes, their fears of each other fed by the daily press. There is a
lot of racism around the Catholic Worker movement, made up as it is of
men from the Bowery and skid rows, as well as from the colleges. Class
war and race war go on daily and we are a school for nonviolence." His
eyes alight with faith, Mike said, "But it is the poor and the wretched,
the insulted and the injured, who bring about the changes in the world,
the great changes that are taking place."

I could not help but think that just^^as we cannot love God whom we do
not see unless we love our brother whom we do see, it followed that our
faith in man (as he could be) should increase our faith in God and His
ever-present aid. "I can do all things in Him who strengthens me."
"Without Him I can do nothing." And this very small conversation made me
pray the more.

But how can we show our love by war, by the extermination of our
enemies? If we are followers of Christ, there is no room for speaking of
the "just war." We have to remember that God loves all men, that God
wills all men to be saved, that indeed all men are brothers. We must
love the jailer as well as the one in prison. We must do that seemingly
utterly impossible thing: love our enemy.

Penance
-------

This last month I spoke to a convocation of youth, fifteen hundred of
them, in Toronto; to fifty members of the Association of Urban Sisters,
working in Roxbury, Massachusetts; at a meeting in the Methodist Church,
of Red Hook, New York, attended by our friends and neighbors of towns
surrounding Tivoli. There were also members of the Veterans of Foreign
Wars there. It was a peaceful meeting, all in all.

The Boston meeting was held on Ash Wednesday, and I spoke of penance. I
said that I could understand a Kateri Tekathwitha taking on the severest
of penances to atone for the cruelty of her people to the Europeans and
for the white cruelty to the Indians. (One must judge oneself first.) Or
the penances of a St. Rose of Lima, in a time when the Indians were
systematically being killed off, and African slave labor was being
imported to supply the labor which the Indians could not stand up under.

Penance seems to be ruled out today. One hears the Mass described as
Sacrament, not as Sacrifice. But how are we to keep our courage unless
the Cross, that mighty failure, is kept in view? Is the follower greater
than his master? What attracts one in a Che Guevara and Ho Chi Minh is
the hardships and the suffering they endured in living their lives of
faith and hope. It is not the violence, the killing of one's enemies. A
man is a man, and to hear him crying out in pain and anguish, whether he
is friend or enemy, is to have one's heart torn in unutterable sorrow.
The impulse to stand out against the State and go to jail rather than
serve is an instinct for penance, to take on some of the suffering of
the world, to share in it.

Father Anthony Mullaney, O.S.B. who is one of the "Milwaukee Fourteen"
priests and laymen who burned draft records with napalm- -''burning
property, not people"- - told me, when I met him in Boston the other
day, that over a hundred of the students of St. Anselm's in Manchester,
New Hampshire, signed a petition to the court, which they are going to
send when the Milwaukee 14 are sentenced, offering to divide up the
months or years the fourteen have to serve, and take on the sentences
for them. He will be speaking next month at Town Hall, and we will learn
more about, this: What is this but an offer to do penance, another
example of trying to follow in the steps of Christ, who took on himself
our sins and in so doing overcame both sin and death?

This is, in effect what Chuck Matthei, Chicago draft refuser, is doing,
in not cooperating with the prison authorities when they seized him most
brutally and literally dragged him, handcuffed, to West St. Federal
prison in New York, where he is now, fasting from food, and sometimes
water, too.

To just read about these things or hear of them is not enough. One must
meet Chuck and see the brightness of his face, feel the gentle and
joyous and truly loving spirit, to get a glimpse of an understanding of
what he is doing.

The thing is to recognize that not all are called, not all have the
vocation, to demonstrate in this way, to fast, to endure the pain and
long drawn out nerve-racking suffering of prison life. We do what we
can, and the whole field of all the works of mercy is open to us. There
is a saying, "Do what you are doing." If you are a student, study,
prepare, in order to give to others, and keep alive in yourselves, the
vision of a new social order. All work, whether building, increasing
food production, running credit unions, working in factories which
produce for true human needs, working in the smallest of industries, the
handcrafts -- all these things can come under the heading of the works
of mercy, which are the opposite of the works of war.

It is a penance to work, to give oneself to others, to endure the
pinpricks of community living. One would certainly say on many
occasions, "give me a good thorough, frank outgoing war, rather than the
sneak attacks, stabs in the back, sparring, detracting, defaming, hand
to hand jockeying for position that goes on in offices and good works of
all kinds, another and miserably petty kind of war." St. Paul said that
"he died daily." This too is penance, to be taken cheerfully, joyfully,
with the hope that our own faith and joy in believing will strengthen
Chuck and all the others in jail.

Let us remember too, those "mutineers," the soldiers who protested the
killing of one of their number by a shot in the back in the Presidio on
the West Coast, and their sixteen-year sentences at hard labor.

So let us rejoice in our own petty sufferings and thank God we have a
little penance to offer, in this holy season. "An injury to one is an
injury to all," the Industrial Workers of the World proclaimed: So an
act of love, a voluntary taking on oneself of some of the pain of the
world, increases the courage and love and hope of all.
