% On Pilgrimage - March 1969
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1969, pp. 2,7

*Summary: Explains why the paper is often late. Describes recent Friday
Night Meetingsâ€"a scholar of Martin Buber, volunteers to China during
the cultural revolution, a PAX meeting and an article by Thomas Merton
on non-violence. (DDLW \#896).*

We went to press last month on February 20th. This month we are going
to press on March 26th. When our readers will get their papers is
another question. We are what one might call a home industry; sometimes
the mailing room is full of workers and sometimes the work of mailing
out the paper drags along interminably, it seems. We have many
volunteers and many young people coming to help, but there are also the
wounded in mind and body, who seem to be constantly increasing in
number. Fear and violence grow in the neighborhood (and even at the
farm) and our St. Joseph's house seems an oasis of peace and quiet.
But sometimes the more people there are, the less work gets done on the
paper, perhaps just because it is paper work and our young ones
wish to be dealing with human beings and not with paper. I make this
involved justification for our delays, because I realize that our
readers are livings beings too; they write in and ask why the delays.
Our paper is a vital communication with them. The most complimentary
letters we get are from far distant parts, Australia and South America,
where readers tell me that they do not mind getting the March paper in
May, since we are discussing eternal truths in the light of history,
past and present, and not reporting spot news.

So I call attention to the fact that from now on we will publish nine
times a year instead of eleven. There will be a March-April, a
July-August and an October-November issue, and some issues will be
twelve pages instead of eight.

Friday Night Meetings
---------------------

We have had some memorable meetings lately for some time now. Our
first Friday meetings have been PAX meetings, which used to be held in
the upper room of the Paraclete Book Shop on East 74th Street. The
last one was about Martin Buber, and the speaker was Natalie Barton, a
Sister of the Ladies of Zion. She had spent the last six years in
writing her dissertation on this great and controversial figure. She
spoke of the I-thou relationship and said that to love takes all our
creativity. Martin Buber has written of the time when he spent the
morning in prayer and, filled with the joy of it, responded inadequately
to a young man who visited him. His visitor afterwards committed suicide
and Buber realized that he had been too full of himself and too little
open to the other. There had been too little creativeness in this
encounter, the creativeness which takes every ounce of one  's spiritual
energy and which is so intense that it cannot be sustained for more than
a twenty-minute period, but which is so fruitful that there grows after
that, between the I and the Thou a pool of living   water from which
one can draw strength. I as sure my explanation, my understanding of
what she said, is most inadequate, but the point is so important that
one must try to voice it.

I felt this most intensely because a similar incident once occurred in
our lives. Many years ago a young man came to us for the summer to help
us at Maryfarm, Newburgh. He had left the seminary and, though he did
not seem morose, he was silent and it was hard to get close to him. It
is hard to talk to silent people. One begins to feel garrulous rather
than communicative. At any rate, we all failed him, and there are always
so many of us around, priest, seminarian, layman, worker, scholar. There
were so many talking about all the things that interested them, all the
latest news, the latest theology, philosophy, Biblical scholarship; not
to speak of all the theories in the economic, educational, and
psychological fields. A few months later after he had left us someone
saw a brief report in the **Daily News** of the suicide of this same
young man. How great his depression must have been that summer, and how
little we knew of him!

My notes of Sister Natalie's talk as I read them over are not anything
I can transcribe here. After all, I did not spend six years over a
seven-hundred-page thesis! But how grateful we should be for such
scholarship.

Another most interesting talk last Friday was given by Neil and Deirdre
Hunter, who will spend Sunday, April 20 with us at Tivoli, speaking at
our regular third-Sunday-of-the-month afternoon meeting there. They are
two beautiful young people who have spent the last two years in Peking,
teaching English. They are Australian and while visiting London they had
run into an advertisement in an English newspaper asking for teachers in
Peking. They were accepted and went first to Shanghai and then to
Peking, living there during the Cultural Revolution. When they returned
they taught at the Institute of Chinese Studies at Berkeley. They are
pacifists and Catholics and intend, I hope, to lecture around the United
States before returning to Australia. They have written a book,
published by Frederick Praeger. I recommend it highly. But you will have
to order it from your local bookstore, as it seems that most of the
books which we consider important are hard to get. One can go to a dozen
bookstores for **A Penny a Copy**, the Catholic Worker reader published
by Macmillan, and not find a copy. It has to be ordered, which takes
some weeks.

The Hunters showed slides and told us of the communes, which are
sometimes made up of as many as thirty villages. Each house has land
around it, food and vegetables are cultivated, and there may be a few
animals. I saw the same pattern in Cuba on one of the collective farms.
Agriculture and small industry go on in the villages so that in time of
massive war guerrilla warfare can be carried on. When cities are bombed
out, people can endure. This decentralization of the people has made the
Vietnam war drag on, as it will indefinitely (so it is predicted now)
unless some progress is made in the peace talks.

As for religion, the Taoists, far more than the Buddhists or Christians,
have been able to cooperate with the social aims of the new China. On
one of the Hunters' walking trips they visited a mountain inhabited by
hermits, and they showed slides of the one mountain with three
monasteries inhabited by Taoist monks. The home has not been done away
with and in some places one will find four generations under one roof.
Grandmothers have their place of honor in the home and care for the
children, as they do in the Puerto Rican families in New York.

The cultural revolution they described as a tremendous pilgrimage on the
part of the young all over China. They brought out the fact that a new
generation has grown up who have never known the misery of the old China
and who did not go through the stirring days of the Great March, of the
schooling in the caves. The cultural revolution took the place of all
that, and it was a revolution of education, of slogans, of the pen
rather than the sword. (Of course there was some violence, but never the
kind of violence depicted by our press.) The Hunters showed slides of
the walls covered with propaganda. The beautiful script was often
illustrated by pictures, one of which showed a peasant brandishing a pen
as large as a sword from which dangled three bureaucrats. These
represented the Maoists, who were defending the teachings of Mao against
the attacks of the bureaucrats.

The accusation was that the educational system was still for the sons
and daughters of those who had been rich, and that too much emphasis was
being put on life in the big cities, too much dependence on big industry
in the face of danger threatened by Soviet Russia on the one hand and
the United States on the other. The peasants, in other words, were being
neglected, and the cultural revolution was being waged to bring the
emphasis back to the land, the source of all our life.

At the annual meeting of PAX, the peace group of which I have been a
member and a sponsor since the second World War, Father Thomas Berry,
C.P., author, theologian and authority on Buddhism who teaches at
Fordham University, was the main speaker, and it was one of the richest
meetings I have attended.

The latest issue of PEACE, the organ of PAX is just out and includes a
magnificent article by Thomas Merton, which he sent to be read at the
annual conference at Tivoli last summer. It is a commentary on the
encounter in James Joyce  's *Ulysses* between Leopold Bloom, a peaceful
Odysseus, and the Irish revolutionary Cyclops, the violent Citizen, who
is a Sinn Feiner.

  How can people point guns at each other? Sometimes they go off.
  Love, says Bloom, I mean the opposite of hatred.

And Merton asks,   Has non-violence been found wanting? Yes and no. It
has been found wanting whenever it has been the nonviolence of the
weak.â€?

Read his provocative commentary in PEACE by sending for a copy to:
American Pax Association, Box 139 Murray Hill Sta., New York, N.Y.
10016. The issue contains two other articles by and about Thomas Merton,
and an account by our own Stanley Vishnewski of the PAX conference at
Tivoli last summer. This year  's conference will take place during the
first three days of August.

Danilo Dolci
------------

I am glad to say that a committee is being formed called Friends of
Danilo Dolci, which will acquaint people in this country with his work
in Sicily and call attention to the needs of his people for education
and health and the know-how to get the dams for irrigation and better
farming, for more food to meet the starvation of that barren land.
Anyone who has seen the **Gospel According to St. Matthew**, with its
mountain and desert setting, knows what Sicily looks like. The new
committee will acquaint people with Dolci  's books, many of which have
been printed in England and a few like **Waste, Report from Palermo,**
and now **The Man Who Stands Alone**in this country. James Douglass, in
his **Non-Violent Cross**, has told of Dolci  's work, and I wrote about
my meeting with him in the December 1967, issue of the **Catholic
Worker**.

Dolci was in this country for three days to be interviewed about his new
book, published by Pantheon, so our meeting was necessarily short and
with a dozen other people, reporters, friends and
committee-in-formation. Jerre Mangione interpreted for those of us who
could not speak Italian.

Dolci hopes to come for a longer visit later and he expressed a desire
to visit Appalachia, to him a mysterious region. I told him of the
cooperatives in Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. Small
beginnings. He is a man of vision. He expressed a desire to meet Lewis
Mumford, and also some members of the Peace Corps, to get their reaction
to it, and their opinion as to how much it could accomplish. We will
review Danilo Dolci  's new book in a future issue.

Today as I write it is the feast of St. Joseph, our particular patron,
since we too have been so hard put to find shelter not only in New York
but in other cities where we have houses of hospitality. We have always
looked to him as to one who found a home, poor as it was, for Mary and
the holy Child. He is a model for the worker, for the craftsman, for the
husband and father, and we beg him most especially to guard our newly
acquired house on East First Street, named for him. Hideous violence
broke out only a few doors away from us this last week between two
motorcycle gangs and resulted in the death of one unidentified youth who
was found bound and burned to death in a tenement apartment.

St. Joseph, pray for us all. And pray that the spirit of penance will
strengthen us to overcome hatred with love. Drug addiction results in
such tragedies, and with many alcohol itself is an addiction. To help
our brothers let us do without what maddens the heart of man only too
often. Drugs are a good to alleviate pain, and on festivals wine
gladdens the heart of men. But we see too much of tragedy. Have pity,
have pity on the poor around us, and fast from the unnecessary that the
destitute may have more.
