% Bills and Things--Day After Day
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July 1938, pp. 1,2

*Summary: Reports on the current worsening employment conditions in the
country, and the concomitant need to send out another appeal for funds,
even though it is summer. Gives an account of the communal work on the
farm, and the problems of bills and the need for help during the canning
season. (DDLW \#908).*

It is a rainy June day and cool enough for a wool dress. After a heat
wave which lasted a week, it is now too cool and it was a bad morning
for the line. A seminarian friend was down the other day taking pictures
of it, and the line of men extended down to the corner and around to
Mulberry street, longer than ever, for now times are harder than ever.
It is estimated that 13,000,000 people are unemployed and about two
million part time employed. One week a friend from Wall Street writes
that times have never been so uncertain and gloomy for the past
forty-five years, and the next week there is a flurry and rise in stocks
due to the U. S. Steel lowering their prices and announcing that they
are also lowering their wages. The great mass of comfortable people do
not seem to realize that we are at the end of an era and that times will
get increasingly worse until there is a widespread effort to build up a
new social order based on cooperative principles, mutual aid and
decentralization of industry and agriculture. Yet the move toward
centralization goes on.

##More Help Needed

We are going to have to send out another appeal. More and more calls are
made on us so that we are crowded to the doors and the farm is
overstocked with guests. We have never sent out an appeal in the summer
before, but it is necessary with the thousands of mouths to feed. We
cannot turn men away who come to us confidently for bread.

Reading the life of Rose Hawthorne, "Sorrow Built a Bridge" by Katherine
Burton, I was given courage to mail out another appeal, though we sent
one out in the early spring. When she was hard-pressed, she kept
appealing and appealing until help came. And we've got to do it for our
poor men. We never did it before in summer because people were on their
vacations and we weren't sure of reaching them, but we will trust to the
Lord to touch their hearts and to reach them wherever they are so that
they will share with God's littlest what He has given them.

##The Farm

This morning the thought of the farm came to me during Mass. I am going
to be in Pittsburgh these first two weeks of July and then in Nova
Scotia through August so I cannot be on the farm as much as I'd like
this summer. But I had one good week there this month and aside from
occasional terrible thunder showers the weather was great.

It was during my thanksgiving that thought of the farm keep persisting.
The need for families there and yet the impossibility of a thousand
families. Someday perhaps there will be a building fund. Voluntary
poverty, manual labor, communal living are part of the life right now.
There is much growth in this two years. This year we have cooperated
with Mr. Wallace, who is over seventy, helping him build his fences. I
say we, but it was Harold Craddock who did all the hard work. Then we
work our neighbor's, the Smiths, to a much greater extent. Mr. Smith,
John, Harold, Charlie, and others, plough, cultivate and hay together.
Boyle and he are raising chicks together, we using their chicken house
and incubator. Helen Smith helps at the house, and we are helping her
buy her uniforms for the nurses training school where she is going in
the fall. They come to our meetings. We must visit and invite
neighboring farmers. And I thought,--the families will come about,--they
will move around the farm, they will be part of the community. There is
every reason to be encouraged after this short space of two years. Peter
Maurin is down on the farm now and will be there for the next two
months, working and talking and thinking. So I feel free to travel and
write for the summer and look forward to some time there during the
delightful months of September and October.

##Problems

The greatest problem on the farm right now is the grocery bill, hanging
over from the early spring, and a car to transport vegetables from
country to city. Our truck was wrecked and we have been getting along
borrowing Mr. Smith's. But it is hard to walk the two and a half miles
to church in the morning and many want to get to daily Mass. And there
are many errands to do.

We need more equipment for canning--stoves, jars, cold pack canners, and
the women to come down and put in a few weeks' work, picking and canning
the surplus. Yet the only housing we can offer them is the barn where
the children are going to stay.

However, God will send us what we need both in the way of humans and
machinery and equipment. We just have to pray a little harder. Pray with
us.
