% To Make Love Loved
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1952, p. 2

*Summary: An appeal for funds. Lauds begging and says what is given is
given to Christ who is sometimes hard to see in the destitute. Says all
are poor in some way. (DDLW \#912).*

To our Fellow Poor:

Who are all poor in one way or another, in soul, mind or body, in
exterior or interior goods. Yet even the widow gave her mite, and the
little boy his loaves and fishes, and the Lord will see to it that they
are multiplied to cover our needs.

All through the year we take what comes to us from day to day to keep
our three houses going in this area, and sometimes clothes come in,
sometimes bread, and last week a whole carton of tea! It is only twice a
year that we imitate most truly the poverty of Christ, and beg. There is
a story of St. Francis, how when he was a guest in the house of Cardinal
Ugolino, he did not eat the food offered but went out to beg, saying
playfully: "I have shown you honor by giving honor to a greater Lord in
your house, for the Lord takes great pleasure in poverty, especially in
the form of voluntary begging."

Individually, we beg from the one who holds the purse here and that is
only filled by you, our readers. In return we give what we have, The
Catholic Worker, its articles and reviews, and our services as your
stewards to the destitute who come to our doors. Your house is full, the
breadline comes morning and afternoon, and there are always fallen ones
on your doorstep. We are commanded to love our brothers with a love that
moves us to give ourselves and what we have earned by our hard work, our
life's blood. It is truly giving up our life for our friend. We are
commanded to see Christ in them ("inasmuch as ye have done it unto one
of the least of these ye have done it unto me") and that is a supreme
act of faith when we can see so little semblance to Christ in these men
and women who are groveling like beasts, who are stupefied by drink *and
by want*. To see Christ in His most destitute ones, and not to refuse an
alms to Him, is sometimes the only way by which we know that the faith
and the love of God is in us. It is hard indeed to see Christ beneath
the bruises, the filth and the spittle.

The Cure of Ars used to say, "We should never repulse the poor. If we
cannot give them anything let us pray the good God to inspire someone
else to do so. Some say 'they will make bad use of what I give them.'
Let them make what use of it they will; they have to answer for the use
they make of your alms, and you will have to answer for the giving or
not giving it."

Pope Pius XII says we should never hesitate in contracting debts to
serve the poor but we confess to grave qualms as we see the mounting
food costs. Every time we sit down to table we wonder if there will be
enough to go around and there always is, praise God, and thanks to our
friends, and to Chu and Bill who are cooking here and to Hans who bakes
the bread at Peter Maurin Farm, and to John and Joe who raise vegetables
and can them at Maryfarm.

The greatest need to our hearts is to love, and the surest way to
increase that fire is to throw on it the fuel of our alms. So please
help us once again. We beg in the name of St. Francis, and in the name
of St. Therese, whose desire was to make love loved.

Gratefully in Christ,  
DOROTHY DAY

