% Peter Maurin, Personalist
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1965, pp. 1, 2, 5, 6

*Summary: Tells a story of Peter Maurin's work at the Easton farm and
goes on to summarize his principal teachings. Peter was a deeply
religious man, a reader and constant student, who recommended books,
especially the lives of the saints. He valued physical labor and wanted
farming cooperatives, "clarification of thought", and houses of
hospitality. His faith was invincible, he exhorted a philosophy of
poverty and the study of man's freedom. (DDLW \#914).*

We are usually driving back and forth to the farm at Tivoli, but on the
few occasions when I have taken the train from Grand Central station, I
have enjoyed the view from the river side, and been oppressed by one
aspect of the view from the land side. That is, the ugly habit of people
to use as dumps the back yards of their houses as well as the swampy
places and creek beds of the little streams flowing into the Hudson. In
Yonkers, especially, there are some rows of houses that evidently front
the street and where the front yards are probably well cared for. But
garbage and trash have been thrown down the cliff side that leads to the
railroad tracks and Hudson River, so that it hurts each time one sees
it.

Suddenly, I thought one day of one of the jobs Peter Maurin had
undertaken on the first farm we owned at Easton, Pennsylvania. It was a
job which illustrated many of his ideas but also his love of beauty, his
sense of the fitness of things. It also illustrated what he used to call
his philosophy of work.

There were two farms, actually, at Easton, the upper and lower farm, and
it was on the lower farm that most of us were housed and where we had
our retreats every summer. There was one old house, two large barns, one
of which we used for the animals, and the other of which we converted
into chapel, meeting room, dormitories, and at the lower level, a long
kitchen and dining room. The entire barn was built on a hillside so that
on the road level the entrance was into the chapel and dormitories. It
was below that, on a much lower level, that we had converted cowstalls
into a long concrete floored room which made up the kitchen in one
corner, and long dining room which could seat thirty or more guests. It
was only later that we had electricity and running water in that
kitchen. For several years we used lamplight and water from the spring
house across the road.

At the very end of this large building, connected with it by one stone
foundation wall, there was a foundation built up with field stone
ceiling-high, which was overgrown with weeds when we first saw it that
first summer, which was so hectic that we saw no further than that. We
were too busy caring for the dozen children from Harlem and the numerous
guests, most of whom were sick in one way or another.

But the winter disclosed the painful fact that this beautiful
foundation, overlooking the fields below it and the Delaware River
Valley far below that, was actually filled half way to the top with all
the debris of years. The tenants of the farmhouse before us had used the
foundation as a convenient dumping ground for garbage, tin cans, old
machinery, discarded furniture, refrigerators, washing machines and
other eyesores such as I complain of seeing from the windows of the
train. (What to do with all this waste, all these old cars and machines,
is one of the problems of the day.)

Peter Maurin surveyed this dump and, before we knew anything about his
project, he was hard at work at it with wheelbarrow and pick and shovel.
He had undertaken, with no assistance, to clean this Augean stable.
Actually, we had no plans then, nor did we for several years, for
utilizing the foundation and making an additional house on the property.

Fortunately, the ground sloped so steeply down back of the barns that
Peter's engineering project was feasible. By dumping the refuse over the
back and covering it with fill (another laborious job since he had to
wheel loads of this heavy clay earth from the wooded hillside further
down the road) he widened the foot path in back of the barn so that it
became a narrow road around the back of the barn and, in fact, a little
terrace where it was possible to sit and survey the long sloping valley
below, a scene of incredible beauty, since we were high on what was
called Mammy Morgan's Mountain, overlooking the conjunction of the
Lehigh and Delaware Rivers.

I do not know how long this great task took Peter Maurin, the sturdy
French peasant with the broad shoulders, the strong hands which were the
hands of the scholar, more used to handling books than the shovel. He
had taught in the Christian Brothers' schools in France in his youth and
though peasant-born, had received a good education.

Philosophy of Work
------------------

I write this account of a piece of work, which I remembered only
because the sight of the dumps from the train window which had flashed
by in one short instant, had brought it suddenly to my mind so that I
knew I should write about Peter in connection with it. It started a long
train of thought which had to do with many of our problems today and
Peter's solutions. I will try in this short space, and no matter how
inadequately, to summarize them, although each of the points he used to
make could be expanded into a day-long discussion.

First of all, it must be emphasized that Peter Maurin was a deeply
religious man. He never missed daily Mass, and many a time I saw him
sitting quietly in the church before or after Mass. When he lived on
Fifteenth Street he walked to St. Francis of Assisi noon-day Mass. When
we moved to Mott Street, where he lived for fifteen years, he walked to
St. Andrew's near City Hall to go to the noon-day Mass there. He never
rushed, but walked in most leisurely fashion, his hands clasped behind
his back, ruminating no doubt, paying little attention to shops (except
for bookshops) or to passersby or even to traffic.

He read and studied a great deal, delighting to find new authors who
could contribute to what he called the new synthesis of Cult, Culture
and Cultivation. Cult came first, emphasizing the primacy of the
spiritual. (Poor proof reading overlooked the error, "**privacy** of the
spiritual," in last month's issue.) He never talked personally of his
own spiritual life, but recommended to us such writings as Karl Adams's
**Spirit of Catholicism**; Pius XI's 1927 Encyclical on St. Francis of
Assisi and the Rule of St. Benedict.

He recommended the writings of the saints, as they had to do with their
practical lives, what their faith led them to be and do. When Ade
Bethune came to us as a high-school girl with drawings of the saints,
Peter urged her to picture the saints as workers, and she drew pictures
of Our Lady feeding the chickens, sweeping a room, caring for a host of
children; not someone to be worshipped, but to be followed. Ade and
others who followed her in this tradition (Carl Paulson in his stained
glass) pictured St. Benedict planting a field, St. Peter pulling in his
nets, St. Martin de Porres feeding a sick man.

Work, according to Peter was as necessary to man as bread, and he placed
great importance on physical work. I can remember a discussion he had
with the great scholar Dom Virgil Michel, who was the pioneer of the
liturgical movement in this country.

"St. Benedict emphasized manual labor, as well as intellectual," Peter
said. "Man needs to work with his hands. He needs to work by the sweat
of his brow, for bodily health's sake. We would have far less nervous
breakdowns if men worked with their hands more, instead of just their
heads."

As a result of Peter's emphasis we were called romantic agrarians and,
without paying attention to Peter's more profound vision, national
leaders in the field of social justice and civil rights insisted on
misunderstanding our whole message, which was one emphasizing the
necessity of farming communes, rather than individual family farms,
cooperative effort rather than the isolated and hopeless struggling with
the problem of the land and earning a living from it. He cited the
cooperative effort of Fr. Jimmy Tompkins and Father Coady of Nova
Scotia, and the cooperative teaching of the Extension department of St.
Francis Xavier University in Antigonish, Nova Scotia, where there is
still active leadership in the cooperative movement. He was deeply
interested in the **kibbutzim** of Israel.

Work, Not Wages
---------------

A philosophy of work meant an abolition of the wage system. An
explanation of that phrase would mean another long article. It would
mean, "Work, not wages," a slogan which Peter delighted in, as he did
all slogans which made man think. (There is a new slogan now, "Wages,
not work.")

It is to be remembered that the first plank in Peter Maurin's program
for the world was "clarification of thought." I remember John Cogley's
comment one time that all slogans, all such phrases, became clich√©s in
time, and Peter, the Frenchman, tried to keep up with the slang phrases
of the day and to probe to the root of them as to what they meant, what
they signified at the time. I remember one of his essays ending in a
long list of such slang phrases, the last of which was, "So's your old
man!" capped by the sardonic, "So what!"

Once, when I looked around our crowded house of hospitality and asked
Peter if this is what he meant when he talked about houses of
hospitality where the works of mercy could be performed at a personal
sacrifice, by practicing voluntary poverty, which meant in turn
stripping one's self of the "old man" and putting on the "new," which
meant Christ, so that we could be other Christs to our brothers, in whom
we were also to see Christ, Peter sighed and said, "It arouses the
conscience."

Yes, it has aroused the conscience to the extent that some of our
readers, (now we are printing 80,000 copies of the Catholic Worker each
month), have supported us in this work to which we in turn have given
our labor for the past thirty-two years, but it indeed is a precarious
existence and it demands a great exercise of our faith to remain
cheerful and confident in it.

Right now, Ed Forand, who pays the bills for farm and city House of
Hospitality, and Walter Kerell, who gets the mail and opens it hopefully
each morning, are talking of the summer ahead and the bills piling up,
and reproaching me for being late in sending out what was supposed to be
an appeal. "And you did not really make an appeal," they said.

I find they are right. This morning's mail brings me a letter which
begins, "Your form letter of a month or so back did not come right our
and ask for money; so I sent none. Today I got around to reading the
April Catholic Worker with its **On Pilgrimage**‚Ä¶Here is \$5 from my
\$60 a month social security." Our correspondent was an itinerant
linotype operator and is a member of the United Church of Christ and the
rest of his letter, his statement of his beliefs, is most interesting
and we will print part of it later.

It is good we live still today, sixteen years after Peter's death, in
such precarity that sudden large bills frighten us ‚Äì such as a
tremendous plumbing bill for the dingy old loft building which is part
of St. Joseph's House of Hospitality on Chrystie Street; and an electric
bill at Tivoli where we need new poles to convey electricity to our
house of hospitality on the land, which is pretty much what our farm
amounts to.

But Peter's faith was invincible. God would supply our needs, provided
we were generous with our **work** and sacrifice. He had never failed
any of the saints, and we were all called to be saints, as St. Paul
said. Again he would call our attention to those who should be our
leaders and teachers, the saints.

Also, such a crisis, he would point out hopefully, could lead us to a
truer practice of poverty so that we would set a better example to the
destitute. "Eat what you raise, and raise what you eat," was another
slogan. Which meant, of course, that you would eat apples and tomatoes
in this New York region, instead of oranges and grapefruit. You would
have wine, but not tobacco! You would have honey, but not cane sugar.
All to which means work, and the knowledge of how to work in the fields.

And as for electricity! The old mansion on the Tivoli farm has cisterns
all around it (which we cleaned out last summer during the drought) and
newly painted metal roofs, and if it rained (the drought is three years
old now and farmers are talking of seeding the clouds, if there were any
clouds to seed, to produce rain) we would have water in the cisterns and
a hand pump would give us water even if the electric pump of the
artesian well failed us. And we could build an ice house and cut ice
from the river to conserve our food and find other ways to preserve it
also, though raising roots would be better ‚Äì I can hear him now with all
the solutions to a problem of survival.

In addition to a philosophy of work, and a philosophy of poverty which
would intensify the need to work, and provide work for others who are
without work in time of crisis, not to speak of the health attendant
upon such efforts ‚Äì there was also the study of man's freedom and this
seemed to be the foundation of all Peter's thought in that time of
dictatorships, when a Hitler, a Stalin, a Mussolini dominated men's
minds and bodies. Man was created with freedom to choose to love God or
not to love him, to serve or not to serve, according to divinely
inspired Scriptures. Even this statement presupposes faith. He is made
in the image and likeness of God and his most precious prerogative is
his freedom. It is essentially a religious concept. It is in that he
most resembles God.

Man, knowing his own personal responsibility, should not say, "**They**
don't do this or **they** don't do that." Whether it was Church or State
that was being criticized and judged. Instead, Peter Maurin went back,
as Cardinal Newman did before him, and studied the teachings of the
Fathers of the Church. "Except," said the Abbot Allois, **"a man shall
say in his heart, I alone and God are in this world, he shall not find
peace."**

These are extreme times when man feels helpless against the forces of
the State in the problems of poverty and the problems of war, the
weapons for which are being forged to a great extent by the fearful
genius of our own country. **"With our neighbor,"** St. Anthony of the
desert said, **"is life and death,"** and we feel a fearful sense of our
helplessness as an individual.

Peter Maurin's teaching was that just as each one of us is responsible
for the ills of the world, so too each one of us has freedom to choose
to work in "the little way" for our brother. It may seem to take heroic
sanctity to do so go against the world, but God's grace is sufficient,
He will provide the means, will show the way if we ask Him. And the Way,
of course, is Christ Himself. To follow Him.
