% On Pilgrimage - September 1980
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1980, 6

*Summary: A series of brief diary entries about phone calls, Masses,
shows on TV, operas, books she's reading, recollections of friends and
times past. A quote from St. Augustine on the love of God. (DDLW
\#917).*

**Diary Notes**

**Thurs., 7/24 ---**Ammon Hennacy's birthday. He would have been 87
years old today.

Who used to go through trash cans and collect books and newspapers,
including **The Wall Street Journal** for me? Mr. Woodlock of **The Wall
Street Journal** used to contribute to Peter Maurin--also Mr. Moody of
Moody Investment Service.

"Their troubles were multiplied. Afterwards, they made haste." Where
does this quotation come from?

**Fri., 7/25**-- Ruth Collins stopped by this afternoon, bringing a
gardenia plant in bloom which she had grown, and some Bronte books.

Dr. Marion Moses visited me this evening. She says Cesar Chavez will be
in town soon for a fund-raising rally for the United Farm Workers Union
at St. Paul's Church, to inaugurate a nation-wide boycott of Maggio
carrots.

**Sun., 7/27**-- Sunday Mass on television this morning.

Earthquake tremors in West Virginia, Ohio and several other states.

**Mon., 7/28**-- Jacques Travers, who runs the Arthur Sheehan House of
Hospitality in Brooklyn, sent over gifts before leaving for France for a
visit with his family. I loved the people in Mexico and Italy--they
always tried to understand you--but not in France. Peter Maurin, Jacques
Maritain and family, Jacques Travers and Leon Bloy appealed to me. The
latter wrote **The Woman Who Was Poor**.

**Fri., 8/1**-- Isabella Levitan Yanovsky called. She and Dr. Yanovsky
are on their way to Long Island for a vacation.

Received childhood picture of my sister Della and me from Della's son,
John Spier, who lives on the West Coast, in California.

**Sat., 8/2**-- Listened to **La Boheme** on radio this afternoon.
Tonight, a program on television about Vincent Van Gogh in Amsterdam.
His letters to Theo, his brother, told of his poverty, his hunger. He
did without food to buy paints.

D H Lawrence and Frieda--his book **Women in Love**. My sister Della
and I read him and wore colored stockings, as his heroines did.

**Sun., 8/3 -- Mass** on television at 10 a.m.

Brahms lieder on the radio this evening. Then a Boston Pops concert on
TV and a Bill Moyers show.

**Tues., 8/5 --**Two books from Roger Lederer â€“ some Tolstoi short
stories and **The Truth Will Make You Free; Letters to the Little
Brothers of the Gospel** by their superior, Renee Voillaume. Of our
Little Brothers here in New York, Brother Peter is a priest and Brother
Maurice is working with poor senior citizens.

A man is here doing research for a biography of Ammon Hennacy. Dan Mauk
spoke with him.

Phone calls from Tina de Aragon and Eileen Egan. One of the women in the
house gave me wild flowers (Queen Anne's lace, etc.) from city vacant
lots! Beauty in the city! I like to press Queen Anne's lace in my books.

**Wed., 8/6**-- Anniversary of Hiroshima. The first account in a morning
newspaper that day was, "President Truman was jubilant." What a word to
use!

**Fri, 8/8**-- Eruptions again, yesterday and today, from Mt. St. Helens
volcano near Portland, Oregon.

**Sun., 8/10**-- Mass on television. -- Nina Polcyn Moore called. We had
a long talk (Sunday rates).

Dorothy Gauchat visited from Newport, Rhode Island. She is returning
there after spending tonight with Anne Marie and Steve Kaune in
Brooklyn. Her son, Eric, is taking care of things at Our Lady of the
Wayside, Avon, Ohio, while Dorothy is away.

**Thus., 8/21**-- Some Wagner music on radio: the Prelude and Liebestod
from **Tristan und Isolde.**

**Fri., 8/22**-- A letter from Marge Hughes' sister-in-law, Helen
Hughes, Seneca Falls, N.Y. Marge now lives in West Hamlin, West
Virginia.

**Sat., 8/23**-- Mozart's **The Marriage of Figaro** was the Saturday
afternoon opera on radio. I prefer Puccini's **Tosca** and **La Boheme**
to **Figaro**.

I am re-reading Mike Gold's **Jews Without Money**, a battered
paperback, its pages yellow with age, but you can still read the
quotations from **The New York Times** reviewer, enthusiastically
recommending it: "It has the deep shadows of a Rembrandt picture and the
high challenge of a Whitman poem." It reminded me so much of my first
newspaper job on **The New York Call**, and my meeting with Mike, whose
name was Irwin Granich. I must try to find another copy, bound and on
better paper.

**Sun., 8/24**-- Music from Wagner's **Tannhauser** and **Die Valkure**
on radio.

**Mon., 8/25**-- **All Creatures Great and Small** on TV, followed by a
woman's rights program (the anniversary of woman's suffrage) about Susan
B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. I went to jail in Washington,
D.C. for woman's suffrage in the fall of 1917, but I have never voted.

**Thurs., 8/28**-- Feast of St. Augustine, (A.D. 354-430). My favorite
quotation from **The Confessions of St. Augustine**: "What is it that I
love when I love my God? It is a certain light that I love and melody
and fragrance and embrace that I love when I love my God--a light,
melody, fragrance, food, embrace of the God-within, where, for my soul,
that shines which space does not contain; that sounds which time does
not sweep away; that is fragrant which the breeze does not dispel; and
that tastes sweet which, fed upon, is not diminished; and that clings
close which no satiety disparts--this is what I love when I love my
God."

St. Augustine is a favorite saint of Frank Sheed, who translated the
entire **Confessions** during a trans-Atlantic crossing by steamship.
Frank and his wife, Maisie Ward, were among the earliest friends of the
Catholic Worker.
