% The Deportation of Francisco Fernandez
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1955, 3, 7

*Summary: Describes the deportation to Spain of Francisco Fernandez from
a Federal prison. Lauds his dedication to human freedom, protest against
the state, and decries all totalitarian regimes. (DDLW \#918).*

This morning, April 6, on the eve of Holy Thursday, Francisco Fernandez
was put on the Italian liner, Vulcania, which stops at Lisbon, Gibraltar
and Barcelona before it gets to Italy, and held under guard in the
tourist class smoking room until the ship sailed at noon. Tom, Roger and
I saw him off. Charlie McCormack missed out because he was trying to
park the car. Ammon was away on a trip to Maryfarm. There was no time to
notify any of his anarchist friends, since the call had come in from
Federal prison on West St. this morning that he was being deported this
noon. The two agents of the Department of Justice kindly brought him
down to the office of the Catholic Worker so that he could get some warm
clothes for the boat. Dick Charpentier gave him his leather jacket, and
Bob gave him several pairs of socks and Smoky Joe contributed his shoes.
The men came from the kitchen to wish him farewell and the whole house
was sad to see him go. We had grown to love him very much. He had worked
with us, baking bread, 300 loaves a week, making sandals, taking the
Puerto Rican children from next door down to the farm for a rest for
their mother and fun for them, and bringing one of the Scupoli kids into
the zoo last week.

He had spent the last few days in the Federal prison with two or three
hundred other prisoners, detained for narcotic charges, counterfeiting,
and other offenses against the Federal law. There were the Puerto Rican
Nationalists waiting to be sent back to Puerto Rico to the inhuman
prisons there. Political prisoners, criminals, all are treated alike,
the non violent with the violent, but the place is clean, the food is
good, the guards impersonal, not bullying. There were radio, television,
movies. There were also bars at the windows and locks on the doors. When
you visited, you sat behind glass partitions and spoke through a
telephone. It is strange, sitting so close to anyone, looking them in
the eyes, seeing their mouths move and hearing them only through the
earphones.

Francisco is in prison, without freedom, because he believes in freedom.
He is ready to lay down his life for an idea, to place such an emphasis
on freedom that men will begin to realize what they have lost. (We would
not talk so much about it if we had not lost it.) Before the first world
war, there was no such thing as passports and visa's and all these
barriers to immigration that the Pope has so spoken against when he
cries out for a living space for the poor. Now we are ticketed, and
docketed and numbered, and registered and secured, and it is a sad and
pitiful thing to see a man fumbling for papers to prove his existence,
his right to work, to eat.

Francisco's life is a protest against the State. Offered a parole, he
refused to sign it. To him, that would be placing a pinch of incense on
the altar of Caesar. The early Christians no doubt were just as hard to
understand. But in these days of the totalitarian State, when we have
lived through the regimes of a Hitler, a Mussolini, a Stalin and their
equivalents, when we see whole countries becoming satellite countries,
we realize that if there were more Francisco's, unafraid of jails and
firing squads, half the world would not be enslaved today. Or how much
more than half is it?

Francisco deserted from Franco's Navy nine years ago and jumping ship
stayed here in America, aside from one year in Paris. We do not know
what will happen to him in Spain. We beg your prayers.
