% Background for Peter Maurin
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1945, 3,7.

*Summary: A chapter from her unpublished book "Peter Maurin." Comments
on P. Maurin's thoughts on capitalism and socialism and the idea that
Papal Encyclicals try to make an "acquisitive society functional." (DDLW
\#151).*

**This is another chapter from "About Peter Maurin," by Dorothy Day.
Every now and then we will run a chapter (not consecutive ones). We
would like to be able to tell you when the book is going to come out,
but we are trying to make up our minds whether or not to publish it
ourselves. We would like to bring out a cheap, paper covered edition
which would be within the price reach of all. But wartime and paper
priorities and printing bills make us hesitate. If we had a printing
fund (and anyone who is interested in our publishing the "Peter" book
can let us hear from them) we might go ahead.**Â 


THIS noon I met Peter down at St. Andrew's Church and we walked along
the Bowery to the Eclipse Restaurant, where he usually has his
breakfast. The Eclipse is a large, square, unattractive store, larger
than the usual coffee shop, with the walls painted a swampy green and
the lights not very bright. This is probably a good thing because
wherever one looks all is dirt and neglect.

Floors are dirty and covered with sawdust. Cockroaches chase each other
in all directions. I don't mean that they are thick, but wherever you
look between the piles of bread on the counter, under the edges of the
tables, on the floor at your feet, on the wall where you hang your coat
and see always a scurrying insect. It is the same in our own Houses of
Hospitality, most of them.

Not that this condition is known only to those on the Bowery. One of our
friends, a priest at a Benedictine priory, in order to comfort us when
we were having coffee in our kitchen at Saint Joseph's House, told us
about the cockroaches in their kitchen where they have a good deal of
help. "Only the other night," he said, "I had missed supper and was
looking for a snack in the ice box and there were so many cockroaches
swarming over the box I was afraid to open the door for fear of letting
them in. So I went to bed without anything to eat."

And last week I spoke in the hall of a Catholic institution where huge
water bugs scurried this way and that around the floor at my feet. The
priest who sat next to me killed one but after we saw three or four
others we didn't bother. These were the large, light-brown, variety, not
like the big black water bugs you find in Florida which the natives
there dignify with the name of palmbug.

I certainly don't think the poor ever get used to cockroaches, bed bugs,
body lice, fleas, rats and such like vermin that go with poverty. They
merely endure them, sometimes with patience, sometimes with a corroding
bitterness that the comfortable and pious stigmatize as envy. Someone
asked Peter once why God had created bedbugs, and he said: "For our
patience, probably."

THE restaurant was filled with small tables, all of them crowded. Peter
and I sat down with two Negroes. These left during the course of our
conversation, and two sailors, heavily tattooed, took their places. They
might have been Scandinavian, Finnish, Russian--It's hard to tell the
nationality of these men.

On the walls were half a dozen cracked mirrors, some of them completely
broken in half, and on the fragments, painted with chalk, food was
advertised.

Pig ears, spaghetti, bread and tea, 15c.

Fried mush, one egg, coffee, 15c.

Peter ordered lamb stew which came at once, a huge bowl of it with three
slices of bread and a very large mug of coffee for 20c.

It seemed to me that at every table around everyone was eating the same
lamb stew, and when I ordered fried mush and an egg the waiter shook his
head uncomprehendingly and said: "lamb stew," so I ordered it too. It
was hot. There were a few pieces of potato and carrot, plenty of meat
and plenty of grease.

Over on a counter there were desserts, and here they served not one
baked apple, but three. Evidently they cater to robust appetites.

WE were looking at the daily paper as we went in, containing a story of
a mine strike; also an account of the C.I.O. Convention.

We began talking of labor leaders, and Peter said: "Murray seems to be a
religious man. John Lewis is a Welshman and the Welsh are very much akin
to the Bretons. They are often mystics but mysticism may go in the wrong
direction. From God-centered, they may become man-centered. Murray is a
Catholic. They say he prays. I don't know about Lewis. I hear he has no
religion. There may be the will to power. His mysticism may take that
form but I don't know. Murray has made a very important analysis of
unemployment. People fail to realize the importance of intelligent
analysis of a situation before anything can be done about it."

Since Peter was hungry he talked more or less in fragments so we had no
time on this occasion to talk in detail about the labor situation. I
mentioned that we had an engagement for next Monday with Helene
Isvolsky, the author of "Soviet Man Now" and "Dark Before Dusk," which I
had read with much interest. Also she has had a few articles in
*Commonweal* recently. Her father, Peter said, was a Russian diplomat
and formulated the foreign policies in the time of the Tsar. He was
minister to France at the time Poincare gave Russia carte blanche in the
Balkans. These were the days when the alliances were built up that
brought about the great war.

"He was too Machiavellian a statesman. Helene Isvolsky has been in Paris
since the World War, I understand. Jaures, head of the Socialists in
France, accused Isvolsky of trying to bring war. Someone killed Jaures
two days before the war began."

Peter went on eating his lamb stew with great appetite. He had been
traveling all night, coming from Philadelphia, where the Catechetical
Congress had been going on the last few days. I had asked him to go down
there because many Bishops are very interested in Peter's ideas. Bishop
Eustace, of Camden, Bishop O'Hara, of Kansas City, who is head of the
conference; Bishop Boyle, of Pittsburgh; Bishop Ryan, of Bismarck, North
Dakota. I don't know how many he saw, I don't imagine, in a huge
congress of this kind, there was much chance to talk.

Peter did not look in the least tired, but, of course, he looked rather
dirty, traveling as he had done, jumping from New York to Boston, then
back to Philadelphia and then home again. His shirt was wilted, and his
suit crushed and unpressed. It hadn't been cleaned for a long time
because he had no other suit.

AS Peter finished up the last crumbs of his bread and the last drops of
stew, he looked around him and called attention to the type of workers.
"Not many loafers here," he said. "Contractors come down here to the
Bowery and get these men for railroad jobs or contracting jobs.
Sometimes there is intelligent conversation with intelligent criticism.
I worked with one of these gangs going out of Chicago to Peoria once.
They didn't give us our pay. Only paper, that we were supposed to cash
when we got back to Chicago. We had to take a box car back and we were
arrested for that and thrown in jail. We had to walk a good part of the
day and we took corn from the fields and ate the raw corn." I thought of
Christ and His disciples, as he said this.

"I was with a Finn from Helsingfors. As soon as he got to Chicago he
drank up all his money. These workers don't get much and many of them
drink."

"How did you make out at the Socialist meeting at Boston?"

"All right, said Peter. "The other speaker tried to bring a philosophy
of private property from the Pope's encyclicals. I gave him the
philosophy, the essence of it. Of course, they would only give me 20 or
25 minutes, so I had to keep it short."

"Do you remember which essays you gave?"

"I only took a few. Of course, I had to select here and there to give
the essence. I started with the idea of *Folk Schools*. Then *Logical
and Practical, Real Man, Better and Better Off, Big Shots and Little
Shots, Two of a Kind, Tug of War*. I told them I am the son of a peasant
who could neither read nor write and so I am pre-capitalistic. Yes, I am
pre-capitalistic and I don't like capitalism and I don't like Socialism,
which is the child of capitalism. That is father and son. I don't like
the father and I don't like the son."

"How many were there at the meeting?"

"Not many. They didn't advertise it."

"That's good. We don't like advertising."

"That's all right. I told them about the fallacy of saving and the
wisdom of giving--*He Left So Much, The First Christians, Self
Organization, On the Farming Commune, Firing the Boss*. Then *The Land
of Refuge, Free Guest Houses, Rural Centers in Ireland, The Irish
Scholars*, and I told them they don't have to keep up with the Irish
politicians. They can keep up with the Irish scholars, and go in for
Irish Communism.

"That's a good, positive program for Boston"

"I TOLD them of the Communism that was brought by the Jesuits to the
Indians in Paraguay, and by the Franciscans to the Indians of Texas,
Arizona, New Mexico and California. A fellow who was interested said,
'How is it that they got out of Paraguay?' and I was telling him that
the Indians in Paraguay didn't like the white people. They were keeping
away from the Jesuits because they were white. Because the whites robbed
them and made slaves of them. And so the Jesuits formed there that
communal life and gave them guns and told them to shoot whites when
whites tried to force them into slavery. So friends of the white people
were complaining to the Bishops in Europe against the Jesuits exciting
the Indians; and the Pope, who was a Franciscan, suppressed the Jesuits
because they had given arms. There was an old man from Austria there who
knew all about it, who even knew the name of the Pope. About 70 years
old.

"Then I gave them a philosophy of history and that interested them. They
don't know those things. That gives them a light. Glass, the Socialist,
put it this way. He said that we were Christian communists--but he was
trying to figure out the encyclicals on the social order. These
encyclicals, I told him. were trying to make an acquisitive society
functional. We consider this society a product of capitalism and we are
trying to go back to a functional society: they had one once, before it
had decayed into acquisitiveness.

The original guilds had the idea. There is a pamphlet, *'The Sound Old
Guilds*,' the Paulist Press publishes it. Glass had a better conception
of guilds than most people.

"There were no guilds in rural districts. What they had was an ideology.
The ideology of the Gospel.

The encyclicals try to convert an acquisitive society into a functional
society. We personally renounce the acquisitive society altogether. It
is a question of techniques.

"If the others are eager, they would start associations of Catholic
employers. They don't. They just talk about it. They would have the
cooperation of the A.C.T.U., which fosters changing an acquisitive
society into a functional one. We go back, it is simpler. We go back to
the simple life. Even Thoreau was talking about it, and Gandhi is an
admirer of Thoreau.

The National Catholic Welfare Conference used to be connected with the
Rural Life Conference. The Catholic Rural Life Conference talks about
homesteads. We favor communes. What we foster did exist one time. We go
back.

Â "IT was the same with the House of Hospitality. We had to prove to the
Bishops it could be done. The Bishop of Sacramento says it almost does
itself. It is not like people asking for money and saying, 'rely on my
judgment.' It's people who give of themselves to the leaders themselves.

"Some will tell me that is not in the encyclicals. They don't know the
encyclicals. The one on St. Francis for instance. Ours is Franciscan and
Benedictine stuff.

"They have abandoned Franciscanism and so we will show them the way by
proving it can be done.

"The idea is now people don't work if they don't get wages. Even the
workers become just as acquisitive as the Chambers of Commerce. We know
some workers who can't take it. Some get drunk. They become intoxicated
with the spirits. We think they can become intoxicated with the spirit
and wouldn't care about spirits any more. Father Gillis says things are
becoming worse. But when things become worse people cease to be
indifferent. That is the hardest thing to contend with--indifference.
People are preoccupied about this world. About people living in this
world. If we were more preoccupied about the next world, maybe it would
solve the problems of this world, too. People are beginning to pay
attention to the priests and Bishops now. The papers feature those
things now.

"Gerry was saying the Bishops' statements seemed to please everybody.
Their position makes for it. We have to present these ideas in such a
way they would--that is where intelligence wins--that the religious
orders would again profess those things. But they have become like the
professors that don't profess. They say that they are not practical. Now
they admit the House of Hospitality was practical. And my cracks--logic
with cracks--are not considered to be wisecracks and they give me a
hearing. So I got Bishops reading my stuff. When the Abbott of Saint
Meinrad's was here, he asked me "Where do you get all those ideas? I
told him I didn't get them--they got me. Now they give me a hearing.

The secretaries wouldn't listen to me but I have succeeded in getting
over their secretaries. Because they think I've got something on the
ball. Through carrying out the farming commune program we prove we may
be able to bring the Franciscans back to Franciscanism. And if you bring
the Franciscans back to Franciscanism you will have the stuff for the
Jesuits, too, as well as the Benedictines. When the Jesuits and
Benedictines and Franciscans get our line of practicality then the
Knights of Columbus will get it too. And when the Knights of Columbus
get it, then the Free Masons will get it and the Free Masons will be
both free and masons. Masons because they will construct. When press
them, is not? Because the ideas get me I got to ex-people expect that
from me." [sic]
