% Peter the Materialist
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1945, 6.

*Summary: Another chapter from her unpublished biography of Peter Maurin.
Describes St. Francis as the great personalist and goes on to explicate
a philosophy of work. Sees it as a gift, a vocation that one should find
what he/she does best and develop it. Encourages scholars to become
workers and workers to become scholars in order that more understanding
exit between the two. Defends Peter from the criticism of being a
materialist and portrays him as an apostle to the world, not of the
world. (DDLW \#152).*



(Another chapter from a biography of Peter Maurin, lay apostle, founder
of the Catholic Worker movement.)

Peter is always getting back to Saint Francis of Assisi, who was most
truly the "great personalist." In his poverty, rich; in renouncing all,
possessing all; generous, giving out of his heart, sowing generously and
reaping generously, humble and asking when in need, possessing freedom
and all joy.

Without doubt, Peter is a free and joyous person. And it is the freedom
and joyousness that comes from a clear heart and soul. There are those
who might say it comes because of his anarchistic nature, his refusal to
enter into political controversy, his refusal to use worldly means to
change the social order. He does not indeed refuse to use mystical
means, physical means, secular means, the means that are at hand. But
the means of expediency that men have turned to for so many ages, he
disdains. He is no diplomat; he is no politician. He has so thoroughly
discouraged in his followers the use of political means that he has been
termed an anarchist by many, especially by our dear Jesuit friend,
Father Dowling, who often has often come to us and talked to us of
proportional representation.

To give up superfluous possession! Peter has no income so does not need
to worry about income taxes. He does not worry about rationing. He uses
those things he needs, in the way of clothing and food, "as though he
used them not." He has no worries about style, fit, fashion. He eats
what is put before him, and if he prefers anything he prefers vegetable
stews to meat, a hot drink to a cold, oil to butter. He does not smoke;
he does not drink wine only "because it causes his brother to stumble."
Otherwise, he believes in feasts as well as fasts, and there are, after
all, many feast days, days of rejoicing, weddings, baptismal feasts,
name days, and all the Saints' days.

Saint Francis desired that men should work with their hands. Peter
enjoys manual labor. He used to tell the late Father Virgil Michel that
if Benedictines had kept to their early ideal of manual labor, there
would not be so many breakdowns from mental over-work. "We must use the
whole man," says Peter, "so that we may be holy men." He may be quoting
-- it sounds like Eric Gill, but it also sounds like Peter.

There is nothing he likes better than building fires, and to get down
and poke a grate fire until it is all but out, and poke kindling wood in
under the coals, and shake it down, and finally dump it, and rebuild it
altogether -- that is fun! Then to laboriously go over the coal -- (we
have no sifters) getting out the pieces so none will be wasted, and to
empty the ashes -- and usually the wind blows them all over Peter, his
grey hair, his iron grey suit and shoes.

I've seen him setting out like that, to give a lecture somewhere all
unbrushed and uncombed, and run after him to refurbish him a bit for
company. "It is for the sake of others'" I tell him.

But Peter is oblivious of appearances. There is not much in the way of
manual labor he can do around Mott Street except to help keep the fires
going and to mend chairs. We are always short of chairs, so each one is
a treasure. Since people live out of doors, a good part of the winter as
well as the summer, the women in the tenement on either side of us, back
and front, come down on the sidewalk when their work in the house is
done, and just sit. Usually they come into the store, which is the
office, and take the chairs. If they like the chairs they bring them
upstairs with them to their homes, leaving us the old broken-down ones.

"That is the way the voluntarily poor are treated," I tell Peter. "How
long does it take Christianity to work, anyway? Because of our
generosity in letting them borrow our chairs, because we believe that
when someone takes our coat we should offer him our cloak too, then the
argument is, ' they do not appreciate good things, they don't value what
they have, so we might as well take them. We take care of them.' I've
seen that argument working in people's minds hundreds of times. They
justify themselves cleverly. The poor don't know the difference, they
say. 'Them as has gits,' and from them who have not, what they have
shall be taken away. That's us."

Peter does not answer, but takes the broken-down chairs, or those too
heavy to be moved, which they have left us, and mends them
uncomplainingly.

On the farm there is plenty of work for all; another reason why Peter
was always extolling the land. People cannot live without working. Work
is as necessary as bread. But what is needed is a philosophy of work.
Work is a gift, a vocation. Before the fall, Adam was given the garden
to cultivate. It was only after the fall that all nature travailed and
groaned so that man has to work with the sweat of his brow and combat
earthquakes, floods, droughts, boll weevils, Japanese beetles, fatigue
and sloth. We have to recognize work as a penance, but we must also
recognize work as a gift. Man has talents which God has given him, and
he must develop these talents. He must find the work he can do best, and
then learn to do it well, for his own sake and the sake of his fellows.

Peter's indoctrinations about scholars and workers has this practical
result around the houses of hospitality. When the scholar starts
scrubbing and cleaning house, the cooperation from the worker is more
willing, more spontaneous. Everyone wants to help. The labor and
exercise tends to relieve the discouragement that often threatens to
encompass the scholar. He understands better after a bout with a mop the
discouragements of the poor man, his slothfulness, his hopelessness. He
begins, too, to understand what Christ meant when he said He came to
minister, not to be ministered unto. He begins to understand the
humiliations of the very poor, and by seeking them voluntarily he finds
peace and rest in them. "My yoke is easy and my burden light." "The meek
shall inherit the earth." But these things are not understood until
practiced. Saint Francis said, "You cannot know what you have not
practiced."

A Jewish convert, who had been making a Retreat with us at Maryfarm,
said some weeks after, "It is hard to live in the upside-down world of
the gospels." Truly it is a world of paradoxes, giving up one's life in
order to save it, dying to live. It is voluntary poverty, stripping
oneself even of what the world calls dignity, honor, human respect.

For truly it must be admitted that one does not always have the respect
of the poor, of the workers. There was Smitty who gave out clothes in
the basement store room every day, and for three hours he took the abuse
of the women and men who came for underwear and socks and sweaters and
coats.

"These clothes are sent in here for us. You're holding out on us. You
gave it to him yesterday and now you have nothing for me. You're selling
the stuff yourself." Smitty meekly accepted all rebukes. He was in rags
himself, down at the heel, wearing his clothes until we begged him to
find something else in order to wash the things he had on. He was so
poor, and looked so poor, that the miserable ones who came suspected him
of their own vices. He must drink -- he *must* steal -- it is beyond
reason that anyone voluntarily should stay down in that dingy rat-ridden
hole, under the five-story tenement and give out clothes and bits of
literature, and keep on taking abuse as meekly as he did.

And already he had been up since five o'clock in the morning, getting
the coffee ready for the breadline, slicing the bread, which the men
soak in their coffee. There were over a hundred men every morning. There
used to be many times that number, but in war time, there were not so
many unemployed. There are the old, the crippled, the unemployables in
the neighborhood. They are served in one of the two stores which front
our St. Joseph's House of Hospitality. The store is long and narrow and
there is not enough room for tables and chairs. The men must come in on
a line, be served their coffee and bread at a counter, drink it and eat
their soaked-up bread, and then go out and let another batch of thirty
or so come in. They can go back on the line again and take their turn on
second helpings, and they can take all the bread they wish in their
ragged pockets.

Smitty has helpers of course -- Alex, the Russian, who was torpedoed in
the last war, and afloat for hours. There is a little Swiss fellow, very
critical of the men he is serving.

Peter says, "people learn the art of human contacts by living in a house
of Hospitality."

Many a time Peter makes what he calls "points," but I do not understand
for months. He builds up a program of action, his listeners concede the
necessity of working out such a program -- and then he expects them to
guide their lives thereby, readjusting themselves to these new ideas
which he has presented. If he fails to influence others as he has hoped,
he shrugs his shoulders and goes on propounding social doctrine. He is
content to wait until circumstances arise which will be more favorable
for the working out of his ideas. Certainly through the fifty thousand
readers of THE CATHOLIC WORKER (that is its present circulation), he has
found for himself many readers, many listeners.

He had invitations to speak at colleges, seminaries and groups
throughout the country. Through the Houses of Hospitality which have
been established, he has built up groups for round table discussions.
Through the farming communes, he has directed attention to fundamental
economic ideas.

To him there is a synthesis about all his ideas -- they fit together; as
blueprints for a new world they are unsurpassed, idyllic. But, when it
comes to working them out, given the human material, the lack of
equipment, the vagaries of human nature -- there is the rub! Do they
work? Does Christianity work? If it fails it is glorious in its failure,
the failure of the Cross.

I do know this--that when people come into contact with Peter Maurin,
they change, they awaken, they begin to see, things become as new, they
look at life in the light of the Gospels. They admit the truth he
possesses and lives by, and though they themselves fail to go the whole
way their faces are turned at least toward the light. And Peter is
patient. Looking at things as he does in the light of history, taking
the long view, he is content to play his part, to live by his principles
and to wait.

As Pascal said, "It is not ours to see the triumph of truth, but to
fight on its behalf."

I have always thought of Peter as an apostle to *the world*. In the
essays printed in THE CATHOLIC WORKER, many of them contain an outline
of history, a criticism of history, an outline of simple solutions. They
all have to do with the *world*, this life which we know and love, with
the needs of our *bodies* for food, clothing and shelter. His
philosophy, his sociology, his economics have a truly religious
foundation. There is a synthesis in his instructions to us all, and it
is not just to use the catchy phrases that he lists his quotations under
the headings, *Cult, Culture and Cultivation*.

Father Furfey of the Catholic University, in his book, "The History of
Social Thought," brings out in his first chapter how long the history of
the human race is. Richarz, he says, has summarized the evidence which
proves that 30,000 years is the absolute minimum, and then he goes on to
talk about early human remains of the Pleistocene period, which began
from 300,000 to a million years ago, with the weight of opinion
inclining more and more to the larger figure. Thomas Mann, in the
prelude to Joseph and His Brothers, says that experts estimate the age
of the human species as 500,000 years, and calls it a scant reckoning.
By the side of these figures, the 1,945 years of Christianity seem
relatively an instant in the history of the world.

With this fresh point of view, Peter does not find it at all
extraordinary to expect people to try to begin now to put into practice
some of the social ideas, not only of the New Testament, but of the old.
Unless we try to put these ideas into practice, we are guilty of
secularism, so tersely condemned by Pope Pius XI. Unless we are trying
to put the social ideas of the Gospel into practice, we are not showing
our love for our neighbor. "And how can we love God Whom we have not
seen, unless we love our brother whom we do see," as Saint John wrote.
Unless we are putting these social ideas into practice, recognizing the
correlation of the soul and body, we are using religion as an insurance
policy, as a prop, as a comfort in affliction, and not only is religion
then truly an opiate of the people, but we are like men who "beholding
our face in a glass, go away, not mindful of what manner of men we are."

Peter does not talk subjectively about religion. He brings to us
quotations and books and ideas that, by stimulating the mind to know,
will encourage the heart to love.

Three quotations from the first letter of Saint John epitomize Peter's
religious attitude for me.

"No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God abideth
in us; and His charity is perfected in us…"

"If any man say: I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar. For
he that loveth not his brother whom he seeth, how can he love God whom
he seeth not?…"

"He that hath the substance of this world and shall see his brother in
need and shall shut up his heart from him; how doth the charity of God
abide in him?"

And there is that sentence of Saint James, "If a brother or sister be
naked and want daily food, and one of you say to them, Go in peace, be
ye warmed and filled; yet give them not those things that are necessary
for the body, what shall it profit?"

And, of course, to sum it all up, there are those never-to-be-forgotten
words of Our Lord, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these
My brethren, ye have done it unto Me."

It is the above quotations that point the reason for Peter's
preoccupation with the material details of this world, with the social
order, with the need of rebuilding as he says, "within the shell of the
old, with a philosophy which is so old that it looks like new."

And this preoccupation of his with business, with economics, with
agriculture, with labor, with capital, with credit unions, maternity
guilds, with cooperatives, his unceasing emphasis on the fact that these
are the vital concerns of religion, have led people to think of him as a
*materialist!* "Laying too much emphasis on the material!" they say,
piously, and return to their prayers. "After all, we must use our
spiritual weapons, we must devote ourselves to religious service, and
all these things will be added unto us." And withdrawing themselves,
"keeping themselves unspotted from the world," they again are guilty of
secularism, of using religion as an opiate.
