% Letter To Our Readers at the Beginning of Our Fifteenth Year
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1947, 1,3.

*Summary: Outlines P. Maurin's program for social action as the
instituting of Houses of Hospitality, Clarification of Thought and
Farming Communes, and explains where the C.W. has gone with each
program. Reveals Maurin's sources of thought and the need to find lay
apostolates. Traces personal sacrifices to Jesus' command in the gospels
and asserts that the state cannot take over this duty. (DDLW \#155).*


"It is better to light a candle than to sit complaining of the dark."
Chinese proverb.

Dear Fellow Workers in Christ:
------------------------------

This merry month of May, this month of Mary, this most important month
which marks thc beginning of our fifteenth year I have offered, with
great temerity, to write the whole paper, aside from Peter's essays. We
have a new farm and retreat house at Newburgh-on-the-Hudson, sixty miles
from New York and up there the men are ploughing and planting and
building, Gerry Griffin and Jack Thornton, John Fillinger, Joe Cotter, Hans Tunnesen, Rocco and Frank Coyle. In a way I would like to have this
issue of THE CATHOLIC WORKER an anniversary issue, and give a resume of
our life and work in neat and scholarly style. But being a woman, and a
much interrupted woman, I can only write a letter, a discursive letter,
which none the less will be packed full of news and events and from
which you will gain a picture, form an opinion, even perhaps make a
decision. A decision to read a book, make a retreat, visit us on Mott
street; a decision perhaps to consider yourself an apostle and search
out some school of the apostolate to inform yourself more about God our
King, and Heaven our country.

Each and every paragraph of this letter will be interrupted, I know, by
visitors, by babies perhaps, by meals, by matters of great importance in
that they have to do with human beings. And in the face of these
interruptions, I must remember what I read of Cervantes recently--that
he wrote his masterpiece, "Don Quixote," while he lived in a four-room
house with six women, and above a tavern full of roistering drinkers.
Not much peace and quiet there.

Peter Maurin's program of action, in the face of thc crisis of the day,
a crisis that has continued these last fourteen years through a great
depression and a great war, remains the same now as it did when first we
met back in 1933.

1. To reach the man in the street with the social teachings of the church.
2. To reach the masses through the practice of the corporal and spiritual works of mercy, a personal sacrifice, which means voluntary poverty.
3. To build up a lay apostolate through round table discussions for the clarification of thought.
4. To found Houses of Hospitality for the practice of the works of mercy.
5. To found farming communes for the cure of unemployment. To solve the problem of the machine, for the restoration of property and the combating of the servile state: for the building up of the family, the original community, the first unit of society.

To form our minds, Peter brought us things to read, Chesterton and
Belloc and Gill and Cobbett and Father Vincent McNabb, the encyclicals
of the recent Popes, from Pope Leo XIII down to the present day. "Making
the encyclicals click," he used to say with his bright and happy smile,
at what he considered a happy phrase, something that would stick in the
mind of the hearer. Peter is a Frenchman (for those of you who do not
know him) and a peasant, and he has his own way of saying things.

He introduced to us Leon Bloy, the pilgrim of the absolute, and that
great and terrible line of his, which converted the Maritains, "There
is only one unhappiness, and that is--NOT TO BE ONE OF THE SAINTS." He
showed us how Pope Pius XI called our attention in his encyclical on St.
Francis de Sales, to the fact that we are all called to be saints,
layman and religious, that this is our goal, union with God.

"If you have risen with Christ, seek the things which are above. Mind
the things that are above, not the things that are of earth. For you
have died and your life is hid with Christ in God." "Unless the seed
fall into the ground and die, itself remaineth alone. But if it die it
bringeth forth much fruit."

Peter quoted this encyclical on St. Francis de Sales, he quoted the
beatitudes, he quoted the Sermon on the Mount. And these Ideas were
afterward elaborated in the retreats given at Maryfarm, Easton, and are
now being given at Maryfarm, Newburgh; retreats which emphasize man's
dignity as the son of God, the supernatural motive, as the little way to
God; the correlation of the spiritual and the material, making one's
work coincide with one's faith as a Christian. All summer we will have
these retreats at Newburgh, and after the retreats there will be
discussions and work on the land, to raise the food for the breadline at
Mott street.

This letter will be for our prospective readers, as well as for the
58,000 subscribers we now have throughout the world. So I will try to
take up Peter's program point by point and tell what we have been doing
these last fourteen years.

## Reach All Nations, Reach All Men

To reach the man in the street. "The workers of the world have been lost
to the Church," Pope Piux XI is reported to have said to Canon Cardijn,
international head of the Young Christian Workers. It is here that the
apostolate of the WORD comes in, newspapers, leaflets, magazines; THE
CATHOLIC WORKER, a monthly, usually of eight pages, but now cut down on
account of the paper shortage has been distributed from the very first
in public squares, sold on street corners, distributed in front of
meeting halls. At times the circulation which started at 2,500 went up
to 150,000, at a time when labor was beginning to organize and there was
a greater call for the paper for mass distribution.

At those times when such simple issues as the right of workers to
organize into unions of their own choosing was at stake, it was very
necessary to get out into industrial conflicts, in front of factories
and on picket lines, to emphasize what the Popes have said in regard to
the worker.

But there were also criticisms to make as to the acceptance by the
unions of the industrial set up as it was, private enterprise,
competition, industrial capitalism.

Frankly, our position was that we had better work against the whole
order, work for decentralization, in some cases even for abolition of
the machine and the assembly line where it definitely went against the
best interests of man and his needs and his nature. Since the unions
were organized more for wages and hours, rather than for mutual aid and
indoctrination, very often what we have to offer in the way of a program
did not interest them. Our point of view was foreign if not hostile at
times. Often it is a matter of criticism that we have not continued work
with unions as we did in 1933 through 1938. Frankly, it was because we
were not interested in increasing armaments, big business, perpetuating
the status quo, and working in many cases perhaps towards state
ownership.

We must continue to protest injustice, bad working conditions, poor
wages which are general now in face of the high cost of living; but our
vision is of another system, another social order, a state of society
where, as Marx and Engels put it, *"Each man works according to his
ability and receives according to his need,"* Or as St. Paul put it,
"Let your abundance, supply their want." Men are beginning to think of
the annual wage, in the unions, but not the family wage. Usually it is
"equal pay for equal work." But that holy Pope Pius XI, said we should
work to deproletarize the worker, to get him out of the wage-earning
class and into the propertied class, so that he would own his home, as
well as his tools.

Join the Apostolate
-------------------

We must continue to get out into the highways and byways to distribute
the paper even if it is not the food the man in the street wants.
Religion is *morbid* to most people, and indeed it is a matter of dying
to self, in order to live for God and one's neighbor. Religion has too
long been the opium of the people, the opiate of the people. I forget
how the jingle in the first issue of INTEGRITY ran, but the sense of it
was this:

>John Smith puts on his hat and  
>goes to Church on Sunday,  
>And John Smith goes to hell for  
>what he does on Monday.

Not Saturday night, mind you, when he may be taking surcease from care
in some tavern, but for the work he engages in, whether it is the
advertising business, or a fat job in the Rubber Company or Copper or
Nickel Mines, or a Steamship company. We participate in the sin of
others, we are all helping to make the kind of a world that makes for
war.

Yes, let us get out into Union Square, along Forty Second street, in
front of Madison Square Garden and distribute and sell THE CATHOLIC
WORKER. We have been doing that for many years, but we need to do much
more of it. As the older ones get tired (and Stanley has become a tired
radical in this job of selling the paper), let the younger students and
workers take over the job of being fools for Christ. One seminarian sold
the paper all one summer for us. One rainy night when we were going into
a CIO meeting there he was, standing in the downpour shouting READ THE
CATHOLIC WORKER--THE ONLY THING THAT ISN'T ALL WET!

Big Dan used to call out (in opposition to Communist salesmen, who
shouted, Read the Daily Worker), "READ THE CATHOLIC WORKER DAILY."

Leaflets, pamphlets, papers as well as more scholarly journals, are
needed to reach the man in the street. Here is a letter which came last
month: "We have been receiving a hundred CATHOLIC WORKERS a month and
selling and distributing them in Columbus Circle. Do publish an appeal
for more zeal on the part of Catholics in getting the Catholic message
to the worker, to the poor, to the oppressed. There is a colored
Catholic couple in Philadelphia and they would like a supply of fifty
papers every month to distribute in their neighborhood."

Many an apostle has been found by selling Catholic literature on the
street corner; he has been queried as to his positions and beliefs and
has had to begin to study "to know the reason for the faith that is in
him" in order to answer all the questions that are put to him. And many
a time he just can't answer them and it's no use his trying.

Houses Needed For Hospitality
-----------------------------

*To reach the masses through the spiritual and the corporal works of
mercy.* Of course getting Catholic literature around is performing quite
a few of those tasks. It is *enlightening the ignorant and counseling
the doubtful, comforting the afflicted*, and you might even say that
walking on a picket line is doing these things too, as well as *rebuking
the sinner*. But when we talk of the works of mercy, we usually think of
feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, and sheltering the homeless.

We have had to do them all even to *burying the dead*. One does not
necessarily have to establish, run, or live in a House of Hospitality,
as Peter named the hospices we have been running around the country, in
order to practice the works of mercy. The early Fathers of the Church
said that every house should have a Christ's room. But it is generally
only the poorest who are hospitable. A young college graduate
hitchhiking across the country during the depression (he was trying to
make up his mind about his vocation) said that the only place he found
hospitality was among the Negroes and the Mexicans. Certainly priests'
housekeepers did not extend any. He met so much misery and starvation
even, that when he reached Los Angeles he finally started a House of
Hospitality there, and in that house he met with so many impossible
cases that he turned more and more to the spiritual weapons, and now he
is a priest, with the most powerful weapons of all in his hands.

Every house should have a Christ's room. The coat which hangs in your
closet belongs to the poor. If your brother comes to you hungry and you
say, Go be thou filled, what kind of hospitality is that? It is no use
turning people away to an agency, to the city or the state or the
Catholic Charities. It is you yourself who must perform the works of
mercy. Often you can only give the price of a meal, or a bed on the
Bowery. Often you can only hope that it will be spent for that. Often
you can literally take off a garment if it only be a scarf and warm some
shivering brother. But *personally*, at a *personal sacrifice*, these
were the ways Peter used to insist, to combat the growing tendency on
the part of the State to take over. The great danger was the State
taking over the job which our Lord Himself gave us to do, "Inasmuch as
you did it unto one of the least of these my brethren, you have done it
unto me."

Of course husbands must be considered, and wives must be considered, and
children. One must look after one's own family it is true. But Fr Coady
said once, "We can all do ten times as much as we think we can do."

Right now we have two Houses of Hospitality in Detroit, the St. Martha
House and the St. Francis House. In Cleveland there is the Martin de
Porres House. In Pittsburgh, there is the St. Joseph House of
Hospitality which was started by our group, (the Bishop gave the use of
a huge orphanage) and is now run by Father Rice and Joseph Lenz. In
Harrisburg there is the Martin de Porres House. In Philadelphia, the
House of Christ the Worker. In Rochester, St. Joseph's House of
Hospitality for men and the Martha flat for women.

In the past there have been houses in Seattle, Sacramento, San
Francisco, Los Angeles, St. Louis, Milwaukee, St. Paul Minneapolis,
Chicago, South Bend, Toledo, Troy, Buffalo, Boston, Washington,
Baltimore, New Orleans, etc., but when the depression ended with the war
boom, and there were again jobs for all, many of the houses closed. Of
course there is always a need for such centers. There are always the
lame and the halt and the blind. There are always the poor we will
always have with us, as our Lord said. There are always those coming out
of hospitals, mental asylums, jails, etc. There is the wayfarer that
needs to be sheltered for a night and those who come and stay a lifetime
and finally need to be buried. The war took many of our young men into
the service, into conscientious objector camps, into the medical corps,
into jails, and they were the ones who ran the houses and performed the
works of mercy. There were only four houses for women and of those two
are still going; the Harrisburg house is a family center, to take care
of the Negroes in the Seventh Street district in the shadow of the
capital.

Unpremeditated
--------------

At one time a thousand a day were fed in New York, probably more. Now
there are perhaps four hundred or five hundred. The house is always
filled (we have 36 rooms and two stores) but the line is smaller. We
started fourteen years ago by inviting whoever came along to dinner.
Many of our workers were recruited in that way. By the time three years
had passed we were given the use of 115 Mott street and the line began
to stretch around the block. We never contemplated starting a BREAD
LINE. All Peter had ever talked about were Houses of Hospitality and he
had hoped that there could be craft shops, and discussion centers and
libraries, and perhaps a chapel, and that these houses would be little
cells of Christian living, radiating peace and brotherly love. But the
evil of the day, the poverty in our rich country, the unemployment in
the age of the machine was so great, and the disability, mental and
physical, so appalling, that our houses grew and the lines grew with
them.

But Peter never grows discouraged. "Discouragement is a temptation of
the devil," he would say "We must make the kind of society where people
find it easier to be good," he would add very simply.

Clarification Thru Discussion
-----------------------------

Round Table discussions go on everywhere, when two or three gather
together. Perhaps there is too much of it in an informal way, and not
enough of it in a formal way. We have regular Friday night meetings,
when speakers come and present a point of view lead in a discussion, or
give a spiritual conference. There are discussions when visitors gather
together, and whole groups, classes from seminaries, colleges and
schools come together to ask questions and to enter into controversy.
There are the retreats at Maryfarm, which in the past have been glimpses
of heaven to a great many, an enlightenment, a conversion, a time of
peace and study and rest.

Peter used to enter upon discussions on street corners, over restaurant
tables, in public squares, as well as in the office, at all times of the
day and night. He believed in catching people as they came, and often
the discussions would go on all night. One is reminded of St. Paul who
talked so long that the young man fell off the window seat out of the
open window, and was picked up for dead; St. Paul had to revive him. And
St. Catherine of Sienna, it is said, talked until she put people to
sleep and then woke them up to listen some more. But Peter can talk and
discuss no longer. He is over seventy, and his mind is tired and his
memory bad. He has been a great leader, and his writings still inspire.
And now significantly enough, many young people all over the country are
trying to put into effect his ideas, both in publishing, in running
centers of training, in establishing themselves on the land and here
these discussions are being continued. If you cannot find enough people
around Mott street to talk to about these ideas, and books that Peter
has recommended, one can go to John Straub or Walter Marx in Washington
or the Center for Christ the King at Herman, Pennsylvania, or to
Loveland, Ohio where there are a number of families, as well as the
great school of the apostolate for women, THE GRAIL. Or there is a
center at Brookfield, Conn., where there are four families on the land.
Everywhere, the discussions started by Peter, are going on. The candle
he has lit has been lighting many another candle and the light is
becoming brighter.

Farm Centers Are Small Beginnings
---------------------------------

There are these centers and other farms too around the country which are
centers of the lay apostolate, though not the communal farm that Peter
envisaged at a time when unemployment was the tragedy of the day, and
man had neither work nor bread. There is a Catholic Worker farm at
Lyons, Michigan where Louis and Justine Murphy live, and another
Catholic Worker farm at Upton, Mass., where the O'Donnell and the
Paulson family live. Frank manages the St. Leo shop there and Carl
Paulson and Mary make stained glass and do wood carving etc. Both farms
are called St. Benedict's Farm. There are nine children at the
Massachusetts farm. There is Our Lady of the Wayside Farm at Avon, Ohio,
where Bill and Dorothy Gauchat live with their three children and are
taking care of a little crippled baby (who cannot live) whose parents
cannot care for it. This farm helps provide food for the House of
Hospitality Bill manages in Cleveland.

Now there is Maryfarm, Newburgh, which is connected with 1l5 Mott
street, and which we hope will soon be self sustaining, and not only
self sustaining, but helping to feed the breadline at Mott street. We
will be having retreats there during the summer, and it will be
delightful to go by way of boat up the Hudson, a slow trip, but a
fitting approach to a week of prayer and study. You can get there
quickly by New York Central to Beacon in an hour and a half, then take
the ferry to Newburgh and a bus to Coldenham for ten minutes or so. You
ask to be let off on Route 17K at the Catholic Worker Farm which is
opposite the Sunnybrook Fruit Farms. We have had our first retreat
already, Easter week, dedicated to rejoicing.

This is a brief summary of the Catholic Worker and its aims and purposes
in the lay apostolate. Often people ask us what is the keynote of
Peter's message, and one could say at once, without hesitation, POVERTY.
It is what sets him apart, it is what distinguishes him from the great
mass of the teachers of the day. In a time when we are living in an
acquisitive society, Peter Maurin is THE POOR MAN.

Last month there was a sensational story in all the New York papers, and
probably reprinted all over the country, about two brothers, Langley and
Homer Collyer, who were misers and accumulators and who met with a
horrible end. On receipt of a telephone call, police broke into a house
on upper Fifth Avenue in the Harlem section, a four story house which in
this housing shortage could have been converted into homes for four
families. They found Homer, who had been blind and helpless, dead from
starvation. His brother had disappeared. The house was so filled with
junk that Langley had had to tunnel his way through to go in and out of
the house to make their few purchases. In fear of intrusion, he had made
booby traps with hundreds of pounds of old iron ready to fall on whoever
threatened their privacy. One of these booby traps caught Langley who
smothered to death within a few feet of his blind brother, who on
account of the junk, could not reach either his brother or the window to
call for help.

He slowly starved to death, while listening to the rats feeding on the
corpse of Langley a few feet away.

This story seems to me a vision of hell, a very literal and appalling
sample of the hell that awaits the acquisitive, the greedy, the
accumulators, the seekers after markets, wealth, power, prestige,
exclusiveness, empire, dominion, of everything opposed to the common
good. Here were two old men who epitomized to the nth degree suspicion
and hatred of their fellows and a desire to gather together to
themselves, everything they could lay their hands on. "They were worth
\$100,000" the newspapers reported. What a strange use of words! They
spent little. Among the things they collected were six grand pianos,
dismantled cars, babies' cribs.

Peter, on the other hand has accumulated nothing in this life. He has
nothing but the suit on his back, the shoes on his feet. He has lived on
Bowerys and Skid Roads all his life, not believing that his dignity
needed to be maintained by residence at a decent address, or by stopping
at a good hotel. To reach one's fellows by the practice of the works of
mercy, AT A PERSONAL SACRIFICE,-- this meant embracing voluntary
poverty. Voluntary poverty as a means to an end, to publish a paper, to
put out leaflets, to live on the land, to serve one's fellows. He has
lived these ideas.

And so when people ask us how we get the funds to run Houses of
Hospitality, to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, shelter the homeless,
care for the sick and bury the dead we can only reply that our own wages
are a penny a day and that by living in common we have enough to care
for our brothers. The paper costs a cent a copy, or twenty-five cents a
year. Many people send more. When our bills pile high, we send out an
appeal, and usually this must be done twice a year, spring and fall, on
St. Joseph's day in March and St. Francis Day in October. Always we get
just enough to carry on. When there is some extraordinary project in
view like the new farm at Newburgh, we made an especial appeal for that.
Ask and you shall receive. That is, if the Lord wants you to have it. "I
have no need of your goods," He has said, through the psalmist, and one
of the ways we may know if it is God's will that we carry on this work,
is by the response to our appeals. If He wants the work done, He will
send the means to do it.

Light and Warmth Means Love
---------------------------

All this is set forth to show the validity, the vitality of Peter
Maurin's ideas, of his vision. They said of the early Christians, --
"SEE HOW THEY LOVE ONE ANOTHER" and we have seen in Peter's poverty how
this love could be expressed, to live with the poor, to work with the
poor, and to love the poor. And how great and wonderful thing is this
love which makes all work joyful and all burdens light. "Love is the
fulfilling of the law." And HELL Bernanos says, is not to love any more.

That love is not a matter of emotion, but a matter of the will, a matter
of preference, one soon learns in work like this. To love your neighbor,
to love your enemy, who only yesterday was your neighbor your ally, and
now has become an enemy. Or so they say.

And what does this love mean in regard to Russia for instance?

What Is Our Stand on Russia?
----------------------------

We are fighting principalities and powers, not flesh and blood, and the
Russians are our neighbors, our brothers in Christ, and not just a world
power seeking empire. We are inclined to look upon the small nations as
having much more to say, these days, and much clearer judgment than the
mighty powers in the UNO. We are for disarmament and the outlawing of
the atomic bomb, even if we die for it, even if we are deceived in the
integrity of our brothers. We must lay down our lives as Christ did. "A
New Commandment I give you, that you love your brother as I have loved
you."

But what about the concentration camps, forced labor, domination of
small countries? "The worst enemy of a man will be those of his own
household." "Regard not the mote that is in thy brother's eye while
disregarding the beam in thine own eye." What about our own problem of
minorities, Negroes who are one tenth of our population, Chinese,
Philippino, Japanese concentration camps, the recent deportation of
Indonesians. Have we forgotten about these?

If your enemy hunger, give him to eat. There is always a solution in the
practice of the works of mercy, *at a personal sacrifice*.

The old Testament speaking of our Lord, foretelling Him is full of the
same thought. The epistle on Monday in Holy Week was from Isaiah, "I
have given my body to the strikers, and my cheeks to them that plucked
them. I have not turned away my face from them that rebuked me and spit
upon me. The Lord God is my helper."

To those who call us isolationist, we must remind them that the Good
Samaritan did not leave the poor traveler by the road and run after the
robbers. He ministered to the wounded, and fed and sheltered him, and
did not seem in the least concerned for justice to be done to the
thieves, or revenge being taken. Love, it is a beautiful word, but as
Father Zossima said, LOVE IN PRACTICE IS A HARSH AND DREADFUL THING
COMPARED TO LOVE IN DREAMS.
