% On Pilgrimage - May 1948
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1948.

*Summary: 16th anniversary recapitulation of distinctive CW positions,
especially pacifism and distributism. Explains the C.W.'s philosophy of
labor as serving others. Argues that the problem of unemployment
originates from the machine - and advocates Gandhi's economic program.
Emphasizes a philosophy of work and a philosophy of poverty. (DDLW
\#158).*

It is May Day again, and we will begin our sixteenth year. We have
finished fifteen years in the lay apostolate. People look at our
masthead and say, "Yes, but it says Vol. XV, No. 3.What does that mean?"
It just means that we have skipped an issue now and again, and it means
that we come out 11 times a year, not twelve, but according to some
regulation of the post office department, you have to number a journal
in that way.

Last year I tried, taking the whole issue of the paper to do it in, to
write a general article on what we were trying to do, summing up what
our program meant. But a thing like that is most unsatisfactory. One is
always leaving out the most vital things. Peter Maurin's program of
action was for round table discussions for the clarification of thought;
houses of hospitality for the practice of the works of mercy, for the
study of Catholic Action; farming communes or agronomic universities
where the unemployed could learn to raise food, build shelters, make
clothes, and where unemployed college graduates could do the same; where
the worker could become a scholar and the scholar a worker.

And who are those with whom we have cooperated thru the years, and whom
we admire and love in the lay apostolate, in spite of differences?

There is first of all the N.C.W.C. labor action groups with whom we
first came in contact back in 1933 and who were pioneers in the field.
Peter used to go to all their meetings, not only to hear, but to be
heard.

There was the *Commonweal* group of scholars who were by their writings
and thought studying the "theory of revolution." George Shuster, now
president of Hunter College and then an editor of *Commonweal*, sent
Peter Maurin to me and so started off the Catholic Worker movement.

There were the Friendship House groups first in Canada and then in the
United States who worked so steadily in the interracial field, among the
poor, performing works of mercy and having centers of meetings and
study, days of recollection and retreats.

There is the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists with their papers
throughout the country and the papers they have influenced and the
priests who have entered the field of trade unionism and gone on picket
lines, into the factories, into the homes of workers and into strike
headquarters. There is *Work* in Chicago, edited by Ed Marciniak, one of
the founders of the Chicago House of Hospitality which is no more, and
there are the ACTU publications, *The Wage Earner*  in Detroit and*Labor
Leader*  in New York.

There is the Grail at Loveland, Ohio, and there is the Center for Christ
the King, Herman, Pa., schools of the apostolate for women and for men,
centers of study, not connected by any close ties, by leadership.

There are such publications as *Today* in Chicago, and *Integrity* in
New York, animated by much the same spirit, and to whom we owe much, as
they owe much to us. There is official Catholic Action, not recognized
in many a diocese, but making a beginning here and there about the
country and stimulating and arousing the laity. *Fides* publications at
South Bend, which recently published Cardinal Suhard's *Growth or
Decline?*, *Concord*, the student publication gotten out by the Young
Christian Students, *The Catholic Lawyer*, published also from Notre
Dame, all these are evidences of specialized Catholic Action, of the
apostolate of like to like.

Retreats
--------

There are the retreat movements, and we refer especially to our own
because it is a basic retreat open for both colored and white, Catholic
and non-Catholic, men and women, young and old, for the poorest of the
poor from the Bowery, as well as for the young seminarian or student.
There is one retreat house in New Kensington, Pa., called the Apostolate
of Mary House, and there is our own at Maryfarm (Catholic Worker Farm)
at Newburgh, N.Y.

There are the *Cana* conferences for the family, started in St. Louis by
Fr. Dowling and spreading throughout the country.

And we are part of it all, part of this whole movement throughout the
country, but of course we have our own particular talent, our own
particular contribution to make to the sum total of the apostolate. And
we think of it as so important that we are apt to fight and wrangle
among ourselves on account of it, and we are all sensitive to the
accusation that we are accenting, emphasizing one aspect of the truth at
the expense of another. A heresy over-emphasizes one aspect of the
truth.

Unity
-----

But our unity, if it is not unity of thought, in regard to temporal
matters, is a unity at the altar rail. We are all members of the
Mystical Body of Christ, and so we are closer, to each other, by the tie
of grace, than any blood brothers are. All these books about
discrimination are thinking in terms of human brotherhood, of our
responsibility one for another. We are our brothers keeper, and all men
are our brothers whether they be Catholic or not. But of course the tie
that binds Catholics is closer, the tie of grace. We partake of the same
food, Christ. We put off the old man and put on Christ. The same blood
flows through our veins, Christ's. We are the same flesh, Christ's. But
all men are members or potential members, as St. Augustine says, and
there is no time with God, so who are we to know the degree of
separation between us and the Communist, the unbaptized, the God-hater,
who may tomorrow, like St. Paul, love Christ.

The Apostolate
--------------

This past month or so we have all been reading such books as *The Worker
Priests in Germany*, translated by Rosemary Sheed; *France Alive*, by
Claire Bishop; *Growth or Decline*, by Emmanual Cardinal Suhard; *Souls
at Stake*, by Rev. Francis Ripley and F.S. Mitchel with a foreword by
Archbishop Ritter.

Chesterton used to start off writing in answer to things he had been
reading, or because he was stimulated by what he was reading, and I am
sure that all of us on the Catholic Worker this month, are doing just
that. One of the books I have been reading by a non-Catholic, Richard
Gregg, about the work of Gandhi along economic lines, led me to think of
just how The Catholic Worker movement is distinguished from all these
other movements, just what it is we emphasize, just what position we
take, which is not taken by them. Not that we wish to be different. God
forbid. We wish that they all felt as we do, that we had that basic
unity which would make us agree on *pacifism* and *distributism*.

Philosophy of Work
------------------

We feel that the two go together. We feel that the great causes of wars
are maldistribution, not only of goods but of population. Peter used to
talk about a philosophy of work and a philosophy of poverty. Both are
needed in order to change things as they are, to do away with the causes
of war. The bravery to face voluntary poverty is needed if we wish to
marry, to live, to produce children, to work for life instead of for
death, to reject war.

A philosophy of work is essential if we would be whole men, holy men,
healthy men, joyous men. A certain amount of goods is necessary for a
man to lead a good life, and we have to make that kind of society where
it is easier for men to be good. These are all things Peter Maurin wrote
about. (He is not writing any more, we are just reprinting what has
appeared in *The Catholic Worker* over and over again for many years.
The fact that people think Peter is still writing, is an evidence of the
freshness of all his ideas. They strike people as new. They see all
things new, as St. Paul said.)

Philosophy of Poverty
---------------------

A philosophy of work and a philosophy of poverty are necessary if we
would share with all men what we have, if we would each try to be the
least, if we would wash the feet of our brothers. It is necessary if we
would so choose to love our brother, live for him, and die for him,
rather than kill him in war. We would need to reject the work in steel
mills, mines, factories which contributed to war. We would be willing to
go on general strike, and we intend to keep talking about general
strikes in order to familiarize each other, ourselves, our fellow
workers with the phrase, so that they will begin to ponder and try to
understand what a different way of working, different jobs, a different
attitude to work, would mean in the lives of all. (There is plenty of
other work besides factory work. Not all workers are factory workers.
There are the service jobs, the jobs that have to do with food,
clothing, and shelter. There are the village jobs. Not all would have to
be farmers. We are not shouting for all to rush to the land. There is
the village economy. A destruction of cities may force us to consider it
in the future.)

Machine and war
---------------

The Catholic Worker movement is distinguished from other movements in
its attitude to our industrial civilization, to the machine, and to war.

To make a study of the machine, it would be good for our readers to send
to India and get this book of Richard Gregg's, called the *Economics of
Khaddar* (hand-spun and hand-woven cloth). It is published by Jivanji
Dahyabhai Desai, Navajivan Press, Kalupur Ahmedabad, India. "The symbol
of the unity given to all Christians by Christ himself was food, bread
and wine; so the symbol of unity of all India given by Gandhi was means
to food - the spinning wheel."

Gandhi was concerned with the poor and with unemployment. So was Peter
Maurin. He started his movement in 1933 when unemployment reached the
peak of 11,000,000. It was war which put all these men back to work and
it is recovering from war which is keeping them at work, though
unemployment is again setting in. Peter did not believe in the use of
force, any more than Gandhi did to settle disputes between men or
nations. He was inspired by the Sermon on the Mount, as was Gandhi, and
there was no talk in that of war. It was turning the other cheek, giving
up your cloak, walking the second mile. It was feeding and clothing your
enemy. It was dying for him on the Cross. It was the liberty of Christ
that St. Paul talked of. Christ constrained no one. He lived in an
occupied country, all his years and he made no move to join a movement
to throw off the yoke. He thought not in terms of the temporal kingdom
of the Jews.

Use of Power
------------

The problem of the machine is the problem of unemployment. Or rather,
the problem of *power*. "The right use of power is the important thing,
the machine is only an incident." A spinning wheel is a machine, so is a
typewriter, a churn, a loom, a plow. These machines use available
mechanical energy of men, women, and children, young and old. The old
man (anyone over forty-five in our industrial era) can use any of these
machines. Mechanical energy is derived from food eaten by the person.
Not from gasoline and water power, or electricity or coal. Men have to
eat, employed or unemployed. The efficient thing to do is to use the
available energy, human energy, to combat unemployment. Then we would
not have to fight about oil, and such like raw materials.

There have been many tributes paid to Gandhi for his non-violent
resistance, his pacifism in a world at war. But little to the "economic
validity of his program." That is what this book is about. And I would
wholeheartedly recommend it to all missionaries who have been sending us
their desperate appeals these last years. We must continue to help them
of course, but the works of mercy are not enough. Men need work as well
as bread to be co-creator with God, as He meant them to be, in taking
raw materials and ennobling them.

Richard Gregg
-------------

Richard Gregg synopsized his book as follows (paragraphing mine):

"In addition to being a consideration of the economic validity of Mr.
Gandhi's program, and of one aspect of the Indian renaissance, it may
be regarded as a discussion of a special instance of the economic
validity of all handicraft work, versus power-machine industry; or as a
discussion of a special method of unemployment prevention and relief; or
as a new attack on the problem of poverty; or as an indigenous Indian
form of cooperation; or as illustrating one phase of the relations
between Orient and Occident; or between Western capitalism and some
other forms of industrial organization; or as a fragmentary and
tentative investigation of part of the problem of the limitation or
balance of use of power and machinery in order to secure a fine and
enduring civilization; or as a partial discussion of the beginning of a
development of a sounder organization of human life.

"If India will develop her three great resources, (1) the inherited
manual sensitiveness and skill of her people; (2) the wasted time of the
millions of unemployed; (3) a larger portion of the radiant energy of
the sun, and if she will distribute wealth equably among all her people,
by the wide use of the spinning wheel and the hand-loom, she can win her
economic goal."

Cardinal Suhard
---------------

"You have to take a position on our contemporary civilization, to judge,
condemn or correct it," Cardinal Suhard says. "You must draw up an
objective evaluation of our urban civilization today with its gigantic
concentrations and its continual growth, inhuman production, unjust
distribution, exhausting form of entertainment…make a gigantic synthesis
of the world to come…Do not be timid….Cooperate with all those believers
and unbelievers who are whole-heartedly searching for the truth. You
alone will be completely humanist. Be the leaven and the bread will
rise. But it must be bread, not factitious matter."

That is why we rebel against all talk of sanctifying ones surroundings.
It is not bread in the first place. It is not worth working with. We
must think of these things, even if we can take only first steps out of
the morass. We may be caught in the toils of the machine, but we do not
have to think of it for our children. We do not just think in terms of
changing the ownership of the machine, though some machines will remain
and undoubtedly will have to be controlled municipally, or regionally.

Peter Maurin's vision of the city of God included pacifism and
distributism. And that is what distinguishes us from much of the lay
apostolate today. It is the talent Christ has given us and we cannot
bury it. The April issue of *The Catholic Worker* has devoted its space
to pacifism, and that was the issue distributed on May Day through the
streets of New York. This May Day article is again a recapitulation.
