% All the Way to Heaven is Heaven
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1948, 1, 2, 7.

*Summary: First of a series of articles on distributism (see DOC \#160 &
DOC \#161). Against the backdrop of harsh city life she points to life
on the land as a way to find zest in life. Distributism is a third point
of view, neither Communism or capitalism. "The aim of distributism is
family ownership of land, workshops, stores, transport, trades,
professions, and so on." Recommends reading Belloc and Chesterson as an
introduction to it. (DDLW \#159).*

About a month ago, Douglas Hyde, one of the editors of the London Daily
Worker, became a Catholic. In an article in the Catholic Herald of
England, he wrote:

"In 1943, I libeled, in the course of my work on The Daily Worker, a
Catholic paper, the Weekly Review, and a number of its contributors. In
preparation for an anticipated court case, which in fact, was never
heard, I read through the paper's files for the preceding year and
studied each issue as it appeared.

"I had accused it of providing a platform for Fascists at a moment when
Fascist bombs were raining down on Britain. I came in time to realize
that not only had I libeled it in law but also in fact.

"For years my cultural interests had been in the middle ages. My
favorite music was also pre-Purcell, in architecture my interest was in
Norman and Gothic, in literature my favorites were Chaucer and Langland.
We had a family joke which we made each year when holidays were
discussed. "Let's go on a trip to the thirteenth century."

"And these were the interests of the people behind the Weekly Review. I
came to look forward to the days when it appeared on my desk. A natural
development was that I became increasingly interested in the writings of
Chesterton and Belloc....

"A good Communist must never permit himself to think outside his
Communism. I had done so and the consequences were bound to be fatal to
my Communism.

"That, as it were, is the mechanics of my introduction to Catholicism."

\*\*\*
---

Not long ago at a mass meeting of the workers in a Finnish factory when
the question was asked which they would prefer, Communism or Capitalism,
they shouted, "Neither."

\*\*\*
---

Fr. Parsons in his letter in our anniversary issue said that he loved us
best when we were fighting for something, so let us begin this new
series of articles, similar to THE CHURCH AND WORK. We will probably
slash out now and again in the fray of battle, at Fr. Higgins, for
instance, who makes fun of the Distributists, and at the ACTU, the
members of which are our very good friends. ( We are just trying to
improve their vision. ) And at those who say that it is too late for
anything but love, and on the one hand, just read St. John of the Cross
and seek for perfection; or on the other hand just make your Easter duty
and be ordinary good Catholics. The Pope and the Bishops say that
secularism is the curse of our time. We cannot separate soul and body.
We cannot separate the week from Sunday. A man's work, whereby he eats,
is important.

In other words, it is never too late to begin. It is never too late to
turn over a new leaf. In spite of the atom bomb, the jet plane, the
conflict with Russia, ten just men may still save the city.

Maybe if we keep on writing and talking, there will be other conversions
like Mr. Hyde's. It was reading an article that got Fr. Damien his leper
at Molokai. It was reading that converted St. Augustine. So we will keep
on writing.

And talking, too. They always said in England that the Distributists did
nothing but talk. But one needs to talk to convey ideas. St. Paul talked
so much and so long that in the crowded room one young lad, sitting on
the window sill, fell out of the window and was killed, like a woman
down the street from us, last week. Only she was not listening to the
word of God, but washing windows on a Sunday morning. And it was sad
that there was no St. Paul to bring her to life. Her life finished
there. But we are still alive, though we live in a city of ten million
and one can scarcely call it life, and the papers every day carry news
of new weapons of death.

However, we are still here. We are still marrying and having children,
and having to feed them and house them and clothe them. We don't want
them to grow up and say, "This city is such hell, that perhaps war will
be preferable. This working in a laundry, a brass factory, the kitchen
of a restaurant, is hell on earth. At least, war will teach me new
trades, which the public school system has failed to do. This coming
home at night to a four-room, or a two room tenement flat and a wife and
three children with whooping cough (there are usually not more than
three children in the city ) is also hell. And what can be done about
it? We are taught to suffer, to embrace the cross. On the other hand,
St. Catherine said, "All the way to heaven is heaven, because He said I
am the Way." And He was a carpenter and wandered the roadsides of
Palestine and lived in the fields and plucked the grain to eat on a
Sunday as he wandered with His disciples.

\*\*\*
---

This morning as I went to Mass my eyes stung from the fumes of the cars
on Canal street. I crossed a vacant lot, a parking lot filled with
cinders and broken glass and longed for an ailanthus tree to break the
prison-gray walls and ground all around. Last night all of us from Mott
street were at a meeting at Friendship House to hear Leslie Green,
Distributist, and the talk was good and stimulating so that in spite of
the noise, the fumes, the apathy which the city brings, I was impelled
this morning to begin this series. My son-in-law, David Hennessy, of
Berkeley Springs, West Virginia, who has a toehold on the land, has also
been deluging me with pamphlets. He has one of the best libraries in the
country on the subject, and deals with the books and pamphlets which
discuss Distributism. He will help with this series, and send literature
to those who ask for it. The address is given in an ad in this issue.

He has one of many toeholds on the land. We could list perhaps fifty
among our friends and if we went through our files, we could find many
more. These toeholds have meant, however, that the young, married
couples had a little stake to start with. They had, or could borrow a
bit of money to make a down payment on a farm. Their families could give
them a start if it was only a few hundred dollars. (There was an ad in
the New York Times yesterday of a farm for sale for \$1,200, three
hundred down and \$25 a month.) Even with the bit of money, however,
faith, vision, some knowledge of farming or a craft, are needed. People
need to prepare themselves. Parents need to prepare their children.

On the one hand there are already some toeholds on the land; there are
those farmers already there who have the right philosophy; there is
still time, since we have not yet a socialist government or
nationalization of the land. We have some government control, but not
much yet. Not compared to what there may be soon

On the other hand, there are such stories as that in the last issue of
Commonweal about the de Gorgio strike in the long central valley of
California, of 58,000 acres owned by one family, of 2,000 employees, of
horrible living conditions, poor wages, forced idleness "times of
repose" between crops, when machines are cared for but not men, women
and children. "The Grapes of Wrath" pattern is here, is becoming an
accepted pattern. Assembly line production in the factory, and mass
production on the land are part of a social order accepted by the great
mass of our Catholics, priests and people. Even when they admit it is
bad, they say, "What can we do?" And the result is palliatives, taking
care of the wrecks of the social order, rather than changing it so that
there would not be quite so many broken homes, orphaned children,
delinquents, industrial accidents, so much destitution in general.

Palliatives, when what we need is a revolution, beginning now. Each one
of us can help start it. It is no use talking about how bored we are
with the word. Let us not be escapists but admit that it is upon us. We
are going to have it imposed upon us, or we re going to make our own.

If we don't do something about it, the world may well say, "Why bring
children into the world, the world being what it is?" We bring them into
it and start giving them a vision of an integrated life so that they too
can start fighting.

This fighting for a cause is part of the zest of life. Fr. Damasus said
once at one of our retreats, that people seemed to have lost that zest
for life, that appreciation of the value of life, the gift of life. It
is a fundamental thing. Helene Isvolsky in a lecture on Dostoevsky at
the Catholic Worker house, last month, said that he was marked by that
love for life. He had almost been shot once. He had been lined up with
other prisoners and all but lost his life. From then on he had such a
love for life that it glowed forth in all his writings. It is what marks
the writings of Thomas Wolfe, whose life was torrential, whose writing
was a Niagara.

\*\*\*
---

But how can one have a zest for life under such conditions as those we
live in at 115 Mott street? How can that laundry worker down the street,
working in his steamy hell of a basement all day, wake each morning to a
zest for life?

In the city very often one lives in one's writing. Writing is not an
overflow of life, a result of living intensely. To live in Newburgh, on
the farm, to be arranging retreats, to be making bread and butter,
taking care of and feeding some children there, washing and carding
wool, gathering herbs and salads and flowers--all these things are so
good and beautiful that one does not want to take time to write except
that one has to share them, and not just the knowledge of them, but how
to start to achieve them.

The whole retreat movement is to teach people to "meditate in their
hearts," to start to think of these things, to make a beginning, to go
out and start to love God in all the little things of every day, to so
make one's life and one's children's life a sample of heaven, a
beginning of heaven

The retreats are to build up a desire, a knowledge of what to desire.
"Make me desire to walk in the way of Thy commandments." Daniel was a
man of "desires." Our Lord is called "the desire of the everlasting
hills."

Yes, we must write of these things, of the love of God and the love of
His creatures, man and beast, and plant and stone.

"You make it sound too nice," my daughter once said to me, "when I was
writing of life on the land, and voluntary and involuntary poverty which
means in specific instances the doing without water, heat, washing
machines, cars, electricity and many other things, even for a time the
company of our fellows, in order to make a start.

And others have said the same thing, who are making a start on the land.
And I know well what they mean. One must keep on trying to do it
oneself, and one must keep on trying to help others to get these ideas
respected.

At Grailville, Ohio, there is not only the big school where there is
electricity, modern plumbing, a certain amount of machinery that makes
the work go easier and gives time for studies; but there is also a
sample farm, twelve acres, with no electricity, no modern plumbing, no
hot water, where the washing is done outside over tubs and an open fire,
and yet there, too, the life is most beautiful, and a foretaste of
heaven. There one can see how all things show forth the glory of God,
and how "All the way to heaven is heaven,"

Artists and writers, as I have often said, go in for voluntary poverty
in order to "live their own lives and do the work they want to do." I
know many a Hollywood writer who thought they were going out there to
earn enough to leave to buy a little farm and settle down and do some
really good writing. But the fleshpots of Egypt held them. And I knew
many a Communist who had his little place in the country, private
ownership too, and not just a rented place, a vacation place.

Property is proper to man. Man is born to work by the sweat of his brow,
and he needs the tools, the land to work with.

This article is but an introduction to a series of articles on what has
been written and thought about Distributism.

The principles of Distributism have been more or less implicit in much
that we have written for a long time. We have advised our readers to
begin with four books, Chesterton's *What's Wrong With the World*, *The
Outline of Sanity*, and Belloc's *The Servile State* and *The
Restoration of Property*.

These are the books which Douglas Hyde must have read which gave him the
third point of view, neither industrial capitalist or communist.

In a brief pamphlet by S. Sagar, made up of a collection of articles
which ran in the Weekly Review, distributism is described as follows:

To live, man needs land (on which to have shelter, to cultivate food, to
have a shop for his tools) and capital, which may be those tools, or
seeds, or materials.

"Further, he must have some arrangement about the control of these two
things. Some arrangement there must obviously be, and to make such an
arrangement is one of the reasons why man forms communities." -- Men
being what they are, every society must make laws to govern the control
of land and capital.

The principle from which the law can start is "that *all* its subjects
should exercise control of Land and Capital by means of direct family
ownership of these things. This, of course, is the principle from which,
until yesterday, our own law started. It was the theory of capitalism
under which all were free to own, none compelled by law to labor."
(Popular magazines like Time and the Saturday Evening Post are filled
with illustrations of these principles, which all men admit are good,
but unfortunately the stories told are not true. It is the reason why
great trusts like the Standard Oil and General Motors have public
relations men, why there is a propaganda machine for big business, to
convert the public to the belief that capitalism really is based on good
principles, distributists' principles, really is working out for the
benefit of all, so that men have homes and farms and tools and pride in
the job.) "Unfortunately, in practice, under capitalism the many had not
opportunity of obtaining land and capital in any useful amount and were
compelled by physical necessity to labor for the fortunate few who
possessed these things. But the theory was all right. Distributists want
to save the theory by bringing the practice in conformity with it....

"Distributists want to distribute control as widely as possible by means
of a direct family ownership of Land and Capital. This, of course, means
cooperation among these personal owners and involves modifications,
complexities and compromises which will be taken up later.

"THE AIM OF DISTRIBUTISM IS FAMILY OWNERSHIP OF LAND, WORKSHOPS, STORES,
TRANSPORT, TRADES, PROFESSIONS, AND SO ON.

"Family ownership in the means of production so widely distributed as to
be the mark of the economic life of the community--this is the
Distributist's desire. It is also the world's desire.... The vast
majority of men who argue against Distributism do so not on the grounds
that it is undesirable but on the grounds that it is impossible. We say
that it must be attempted, and we must continue to emphasize the results
of not attempting it."

In the next issue of the paper we will continue with a number of
articles dealing with these problems.
