% On Pilgrimage - February 1949
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1949, 1-2.

*Summary: Discusses Truman's attempt to nationalize steel and argues
that it should be permitted as a transition to smaller group ownership,
or if private ownership is efficient. Mentions the lack of support for
distributism, particularly among Catholics who support government
intervention. (DDLW \#162).*

Stottler's Crossroads, W. Va., January 11.\
 A good day to rest, cloudy and mild. This month I had two speaking
engagements, one in Hagerstown and the other in Cumberland, Md., and so
have a visit with my daughter and her family in between. I got here
yesterday afternoon at four, Father Ballard driving me from Hagerstown,
about thirty-two miles away. Our next door neighbor down here works at
Fairchild's, the airplane factory there, where eight thousand are
employed. He works nights and tries to farm days. He had counted on his
grown son farming while he brought in a cash income, but the boy joined
the army and is now in Japan. There are two young sons in school, and
since they are closing all the smaller schools around here, they have to
go by school bus twelve miles to the Berkeley Springs school.

My meeting was in Hagerstown where I was introduced by Paul Wagner, a
CIO organizer (the auto workers include the airplane plants). Last year
he had done a job of organizing the Victor products plant in Berkeley
Springs (population 1,100) but said that as yet they had no contract.
They would probably have to go before the arbitration board. We had
dinner together, a good meal cooked by his bride of a few months; and
Dan Cassey, also CIO auto worker accountant from Detroit and a friend of
the late Paul St. Marie, was there.

I had commented in my book "On Pilgrimage" on the grave difficulties
attendant on organizing in such a district as this, and I did not know
that I'd be meeting the organizers.-

Nationalization
---

We talked of President Truman's suggestion to build Federal Steel
plants, a first step to nationalize the industry, everyone foretells.
The CIO men thought such a step in the right direction but according to
the Popes and Eric Gill respectively, such steps are only taken when (1)
the industry is too great for private management or (2) should be only a
step towards turning over the means of production to much smaller groups
representing the workers themselves. The latter certainly must be
educated towards it, and must think in terms of the responsibility which
goes with ownership.

First of all they must be taught to *want* it and as far as I can see,
the drift of the clerical advisers of the workers is all in the other
direction. Ownership of tools or factories is not all a necessary
development of the life of man; the proletarian state is perfectly
compatible with sanctity, the belt, the assembly line, must be accepted,
"it is here to stay," "you can't turn the clock back."

Even "my friend who ate sweet meats with me," as the Palmist said, those
of the Catholic Rural Life Conference, in a public statement at their
last conference in December have come out against us of the *Catholic
Worker* movement in the recent Commonweal controversy in endorsing our
present industrial system and advocating a "moderate decentralization."
All they want, what they will settle for, is a share of the profits,
instead of a share in the ownership, and the decentralization of the
physical business of factories and production, and not a
decentralization of control by widespread ownership. As far as I can see
the Catholic is far behind the pagan even in fighting trusts or
corporations. What distinguishes most social planners is their desire to
keep the Status Quo.

Their best dig around us here is a dig at our poverty, part of which is
holy in that we voluntarily accept what we cannot help. We use it as a
means of sharing what we have with others, and is something we will
accept as inevitable if we want to get on the land, or out into the
village atmosphere, away from the "occasions of sin" which both the Holy
Father and Fr. Vincent McNabb have termed our gigantic cities. God knows
nobody is helping the family towards these aims. There are no trust
funds on which they can draw, no credit unions to advance money to young
couples to buy on the land, little help from brother Catholics (although
the letter from Farmer Hinks of the Eastern Shore of Maryland is an
exception). Certainly what hurts most of all, there is no **teaching**
in that direction, so that those who are caught in the economic machine
are positively discouraged from hoping to lead their children to another
way of life.

In their anxiety not to appear "crackpot," or "fuzzy idealist" or
"romantic agrarian" they bend over backward to boost what is at best a
short range program and lose sight completely of the long range view of
another social order. They not only disregard the lessons of
history--why else did the Russian revolution come about except in desire
of the people for land and work and responsibility, a sense of their
dignity as workers? They are secularists in thinking that by bettering
conditions on the belt, man the remainder of his time can be a whole
man. As though one can "sin a little" or be just "a little bit
pregnant," as one controversialist said.

To have any vision of "ownership by the workers of the means of
production," a distributist economy, personal responsibility, a regional
economy, is to them "visionary." They delight in pointing to the failure
of the "vision" of the leaders of the Socialist Soviet Republics and
they fail the people by expecting nothing more from them than the
irresponsibility they now show as a result of the evil system under
which they have so long lived.

The Dangerous State
-------------------

In fact, our critics in their exaltation of the state, in their
acceptance of the state, are guilty of the Marxism they condemn, as they
little by little let the State encroach on one field after another. For
instance if they endorse socialized medicine now (as the editor of
*America* has done) they may find themselves in the situation of Cardinal
Mindzcenty tomorrow, because they will be forced sooner or later to
protest the encroachment of the State, the little by little encroaching
State which the Bishops of the United States warned against in their
most recent statement.

Yes, the workers must be brought to *want* communal ownership so far have
they strayed from the "responsible man." Now they want the security of
government ownership. They want the government rather than the
corporations to take over, so that they can all become civil or federal
employees. Many a time in talking to young people at schools, I have
noticed that their idea of security is to work towards a *city job*.

Of course when I speak along these lines there are always members of the
audience who feel that I have gone "too far." One Protestant minister
who reported my talk for the Hagerstown paper said that he agreed with
all I had to say about the works of mercy (our care for the victims of
our social order) but that he violently disagreed with everything else.
The general reaction is that these are new ideas, so far have people
gone in their acceptance of the responsibility of the state, the
attitude of "let George do it."

This afternoon Tamar, Becky and Susie and I took a walk down through
Peter Yost's property (146 acres for \$2,100). The farm house is an old
hand-hewn log house, two story, four rooms downstairs and two large
rooms upstairs.

One immense room upstairs with windows on three sides was formerly three
small rooms and a passage with stairs. It is renting for five dollars a
month, and a family are moving in next week, by the name of Curran.
There are so many Catholic names down here, and so few Catholics! Only
in such a diocese as that of St. Louis have I heard of priests going to
the land with their people. We certainly try to be realistic and the
terrible dilemma of the choice between city streets and the countryside
without church or school is a tragedy of our day.

It was fun going over the old house with its two tiny stairways, its
pump on the back porch, the log barn and granary and other outbuildings.

"A better house than mine," Mr. Weber, our neighbor to the east, was
saying just a few weeks ago at a pig killing at Mrs. Fearnow's. And then
Christmas eve his old house burned down, and everything was lost,
including \$2,500 in cash which the older people were saving in the
house, remembering the crash of 1929 when so many small banks failed
throughout the country.

The Weber farm is a beautiful place up over a hill through pine woods on
the Hennessy property. We picked herbs on the way, sumac berries which
our neighbor told us were good to swab the throat with (making a tea of
the berries), and ground ivy and the tips of pine trees which the
neighbors hereabouts use instead of hot lemonade in case of a cold. I
picked a box of mosses and pine for Johannah, who with Tommy and Mary
Hughes all have whooping cough at 115 Mott Street. (Later in the month
when Helen Adler took the terrarium to show to our neighbor florist
around the corner, he arranged it for her, and told her of the hundreds
of varieties of mosses he collected himself).

Neighbors
---------

Fortunately the outbuildings of the Weber farm still stand, and one
truck driver son borrowed a trailer in which mother and father and
daughter are now living, with the rest of the family farmed out to
neighbors. Everybody has already sent furnishings for the new house,
which all are helping to build. They were pouring cement the day we were
over there, and a local portable mill had moved in and was sawing logs
for them, and they are going to have to build with green lumber just for
the sake of shelter. The new place will be 25 by 25, and Mrs. Weber was
lamenting on how small her kitchen was going to be. She was used to one
so vast that it took two stoves to heat it. Mrs. Weber's life sounds
like Ingunn's in The Master of Hestyiken, that epic of Sigrid Undset.
She has had five miscarriages, three still-born children and then seven
healthy children! Two of those boys are now working on the telephone
lines throughout the country, and another is driving cars out of
Detroit. Two are working on the new house with three of the neighbors.
Mrs. Fearnow said Mrs. Weber used to be a sickly woman, but now at
fifty-four is beginning to get her health back! She's always had heart
trouble, too. I must say that she looks younger at fifty-four than I do
at fifty-one! Oh, the difference between city people and county people.

It is raining now, and there is a soft fall that I hope will clear up by
morning so we can have another good walk. We hung out a line full of
clothes today and the extra rinsing will do them good. And now I am
having a cup of catnip tea, a country sedative and cureall for colds and
fatigue.

Later in January
---

One could write much more about delightful walks, and life on the land,
but space is limited. At Cumberland I spoke to a parish group before
returning to New York.

Here a Celanese factory is the largest industry, though there are many
other factories and it is a railroad town, too. The factory used to
employ 12,000 and now has only 8,000 due to increased use of machinery.
Someone else put the figures at 15,000, but even quoting the more
conservative estimate makes the situation shocking enough. What are we
going to do about the increase of unemployed, who have been kept
employed these last ten years only because of war and reparation for
war, or preparation for more war! Is it not about time we begin some
radical thinking of what a peace time economy would be like, and how to
give men work at satisfactory and honorable pursuits? Who wants to go
back to the cake and circuses of the depression, the gifts of Holy
Mother the State?
