% On Pilgrimage - June 1953
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1953, 2,6.

*Summary: Societal structures need to be built so that it will be "easy
to be good." Advocates the four-hour work day in order that workers
become scholars and Scholars workers. Speaks of Vinoba Bhave, whose
personalist views enabled people to solve their own problems, by
promoting "the little way." (DDLW \#171).*

A very good way of comforting yourself when you are in affliction is to
keep a notebook from year to year, and look back and see how past
troubles have evaporated. Or how you have been given strength to bear
them. I find that on June first last year, I have complained that every
weekend has been stormy!

I notice that June first last year, Arthur Sheehan was talking to us on
St. Bernard, and on June third, John Cogley was talking St. Thomas,
"What is God." His last of ten talks came in the middle of June. Men and
women who lived in the house came to all of them, and some of our
readers. How much one understands is hard to say. But the mind is
enlightened, the heart expands. As they said of St. Francis, "When he
heard the love of God mentioned, he felt in his soul an interior
jubilation." And Simone Weil said, "From earliest childhood to the grave
there is something in the depths of every human heart which in spite of
all the experience of crimes that have been committed, endured,
observed, invincibly expects people to do good and not evil. More than
any other thing, this is the sacred element in every human being."

Peter Maurin always expected so much understanding from people. He took
it for granted that they wanted the good, the best, that there would be
a response to hearing tremendous things about God and man. Natalie Darcy
and Fr. Oestereicher spoke too last year, on Edith Stein, on Scheler,
Landsberg, etc. By that time the weather evidently had cleared because
this meeting, which was to discuss his book, *Walls Are Crumbling*, was
held in the back yard. That yard now is in an awful mess since the fire,
filled with burnt wood, furniture, plaster, etc.

We talked of silence that night. Silence and the Word, and there was not
much silence round about because I find in my notes, "Planes overhead.
Next door in the tenement, a child crying terribly, hoarse and harsh. A
tortured cry that tears your heart out. Silence--the wellspring of all
great things--and a man next door goes on sawing; filing; there is truck
traffic, and the sound of conversation from a kitchen which overlooks
the yard. And then later, wonderful release, there is only the sound of
Natalie's quiet words, and one feels sudden silence, and above the blue
cope of heaven."

Pilgrimage
---

I notice too in my notes for last year, that while I was speaking at
Pendle Hill, Betty Lou and Rita and Roger and Annabelle went on a
pilgrimage to Our Lady of Mt. Carmel Church on her feast, up on 115th
street and First avenue, New York. I had made it the year before, and I
had wanted to make it again. We set out from the Catholic Worker at
about ten in the evening and walk up the one hundred and twenty blocks
to the Shrine where the first Mass is said at Midnight, and Masses
continue right through until noon on the day of the feast. Anyone who
wishes to join us this year, get in touch with us at the office. It is a
long walk, but a short pilgrimage. Betty Lou made it in her bare feet as
many of the Italian women do! They come from Brooklyn and the Bronx and
walk all the way. Not much promotion about this pilgrimage--it just grew
by itself.

What he means by the damned wantlessness of the poor, and I don't know
where that quotation comes from, is this: the poor want what they are
persuaded to want by advertisements, radio, television. They want radio
and television, cars, clothes, cosmetics, cigarettes, good food and
drink. They don't want to take over the factories, land, in any
decentralist or distributist movement. They don't think it possible.
They are more intent on preserving the status quo of our industrial
capitalist system. So what they get is capitalism or communism, and we
don't want either. We would like to see a country made up of farming
communes, agronomic universities, hospices, unions, cooperatives, small
units of all those necessary institutions to be preserved, and a doing
away with luxury in order to have the essential which is ownership of
house and field and job, and the responsibility which goes with that
ownership. We wish to abolish the proletariat state, rather than
establish the dictatorship of the proletariat, abolish the wage system
which provides men with luxuries but not the essentials. And it is good
to think of the "four hour day" of manual labor that Peter Maurin
stresses so that we will have time to study and to pray. And that last
comes first. If we prayed enough, great things would come to pass. If we
prayed enough, we would grow in strength of soul and body and there
would be love in our hearts, not fear.

Two Examples
---

We have to make the kind of society where it is easy for people to be
good, Peter Maurin used to say. And we have to have good men to make
that society. And so we go around in a circle.

But here are two examples of goodness and love without fear in this
present day. There is a scornful term used nowadays. "Do-gooders." And
yet "Christ went around doing good," as the Gospel says. To love God is
to love your brother. "In this we have come to know His love," St. John
says, "that he laid down his life for us, and we likewise ought to lay
down our life for the brethren... He who has the goods of this world and
sees his brother in need and closes his heart to him, how does the love
of God abide in him?"

When I read of Adlai Stevenson going around Indo China in an armoured
car, I thought of Lydwinne van Karsbergen going around Africa in an old
car with a companion, another woman, and penetrating the most
inaccessible places. St. Ignatius of Antioch went to the wild beasts
with joy and I am sure that the spirit of the lay missionary movement is
that if either wild beasts, or Mau Mau devour them, in the chance they
take in trying to reach the least of their brothers, then they will
rejoice to be "ground like wheat."

Another Great Soul
---

*Time* magazine gave the cover story to Vinoba Bhave this month, and his
two year hike around India persuading the rich to give to the poor. In
the last two weeks alone, he has distributed 356,000 acres, and these he
"looted" from the rich, "with love." One poor peasant gave one fortieth
of an acre, when he had only one acre to call his own. Bhave came from a
well-to-do family, he was a student when he joined Gandhi, he knew
Sanskrit and many Indian dialects and was a learned man as well as a man
of prayer. He travels by foot always, he lives with the poor, and when
he starts walking from one to another of India's 700,000 villages, he
starts the day with prayer and walks singing hymns. At first he preached
*ahimsa*, non violence, but this was not enough.

"I confess that the incendiary and murderous activities of the
communists did not unnerve me, because I know that the birth of a new
culture has always been accompanied in the past by blood baths. What is
needed is not to get panicky, but to keep cool and find a peaceful means
to resolve the conflict. The police are not expected to think out and
execute reforms. To clear a jungle of tigers their employment would be
useful. But here we have to do with human beings, however mistaken or
misguided. When a new idea is born, new repression cannot combat it."

"You must perform every action sacramentally and be free from all
attachment to result." "The way of love is always new." "My object is to
transform the whole of society." "The people are going to solve their
own problems, not I. I am simply creating an atmosphere. The beginning
is always small, but when the atmosphere spreads someone will ask, and
someone will give."

How Peter Maurin would have loved Bhave!

Speaking
---

To get back to this year, during the month of May, I spoke first at our
own Friday night meeting on May first. There were a few of our number
distributing copies of the Catholic Worker in Union Square, as usual. On
Sunday May 3, I spoke at Basking Ridge, New Jersey, at a communion
breakfast, and that evening at Palm Garden, at a meeting for free
speech, and as a protest against Senator McCarthy and his
investigations, which I consider a manifestation of evil, and giving
birth to fear and repression in the world. Man's freedom stems from his
free will, and he must respect the freedom of other men because they are
made to the image and likeness of God and are temples of the Holy
Spirit. To build up fear of other men is to build up hatred too.
"Perfect love casts out fear." Such a witch hunt as has been set loose
in the country today, serves to distract the mind from our own
militarization and enslavement, our growing materialism, and to set us
in the self righteous position of rooting out the evil in other men,
paying no attention to the beam in our own eye. It is always so
satisfactory to find a scapegoat on which to heap our sins. During the
depression it was the international Jewish bankers. Now it is the
communist.

The teacher is afraid to speak of interracial justice, of peace, of
social justice these days, for fear he may be considered subversive.
Loyalty oaths are beginning to be required at some state universities
before a speaker can give an address to the students. This last month,
Fritz Eichenberg, Quaker, who does magnificent illustrations for *The
Catholic Worker*, refused to take the loyalty oath at Pratt Institute in
Brooklyn where he teaches. I suppose that means he loses his job. One
must accept voluntary poverty these days to keep his integrity.

The occupied countries became the occupied countries because people were
terrorized into saying yes, when they should have said no. Hitler and
Stalin, Mussolini and Franco--this is the age of repression and
McCarthy, in the guise of fighting Communism, is finding it in any
honest criticism of the status quo. (Our Lady of Fatima said, "*Do
penance*, and Russia will be converted.")

The Status Quo
---

David Riesman in *The Lonely Crowd*--a study of the changing American
character, published by the Yale University Press, writes (and I think
of this when I think of our anarchist-pacifist position):

"We need to insist today on bringing to consciousness the kind of ideas
that Marx dismissed as utopian. However, since we live in a time of
disenchantment, such thinking, where it is rational in aim and method
and not simply escapism, is not easy. It is easier to concentrate on
programs for choosing among lesser evils. We are well aware of 'the
damned wantlessness of the poor,' ... Both rich and poor avoid any
goals, personal or social, that seem out of step with peer-group
aspirations. In dynamic political context, it is the modest, commonsense
goals of constructive critics that are unattainable. It often seems that
the retention of a given status quo is a modest hope; many lawyers,
political scientists and economists occupy themselves by suggesting the
minimal changes which are necessary to stand still; yet today this hope
is almost invariably disappointed; the status quo proves the most
illusory of goals."

Report of the Month
---

What else has happened during this month this year. We went to press
last month on a hot and beautiful day, April 27. From the printer I went
down to Peter Maurin Farm, and at seven the next morning a group of us
drove to Maryfarm to make a day of recollection, Hans and Ed, Pat Rusk
and Lucille Smith and baby Paul, my godchild, and Bernadette who is
twelve and came along to hold the baby so her mother could make the
conferences given by Msgr. Fiorentino. It was a beautiful day for us
all. We drove back at five and instead of going down the turnpike to
Staten Island and avoiding New York city, we drove to the house of
hospitality, so the others could see the results of the fire, and get
copies of the new issue of the paper.

Then Pat drove them all home, coming in again the next day for the
funeral of Jack Simms from St. Thomas Aquinas Church. There was a
beautiful solemn high requiem Mass and then Marie Kinsley, Roger O'Neil,
Pat and I drove out to St. Charles cemetery near Farmingdale. It was a
fearful drive through traffic, at fifty miles an hour and after narrowly
avoiding a collision a few times I decided to drop behind the procession
which waited for me some miles on. The driver of the hearse leaned out
of his car and shouted at me, "Got to make time, you know"! "Time is
money," I replied, but he did not hear my sarcasm. It is sad that there
must be such haste at funerals and the sense of quiet and peace is
destroyed by speed.

After a brief ceremony at the cemetery we drove on out to the Edgewood
Division of Pilgrim State Hospital at Brentwood, way out on Long Island,
where Frank Wagner and John Pohl are held for tuberculosis. It is a long
trip, and hard to take without a car. On the way back, we stopped at
Bayside to visit the de Montfort Fathers, who gave us copies of the
**Secret of Mary**, which I like to reread every May in honor of our
Lady.

It is St. Augustine who says that the flesh of Jesus is the flesh of
Mary, and that we must be formed, as Jesus was, in her womb. I know what
it means now to sign oneself "In Mary." If we wish to be formed in the
image of Christ, there is the mold.

Secularism
---

Speaking at a dockworkers' breakfast last month, Msgr. John J.
O'Donnell, known as "port chaplain," defended Joseph P. Ryan, who has
been indicted on grand larceny charges. "Mr. Ryan is a personal friend
of mine and a trustee of Guardian Angels' Church. He keeps his hands off
the spiritual things of my church an [sic] I keep my hands out of his
business," said Msgr. O'Donnell.
