% Day After Day - December 1942
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1942, 1, 6.

*Summary: Discusses the objection that the Catholic Worker has made
pacifism a precept, not a counsel like poverty, chastity, and obedience.
Says over emphasis on authority leads to totalitarianism. Violent means
will not bring forth an end result of peace. (DDLW \#220).*

It's a bitter cold day outside though bright and sunny. The streets seem
strangely empty on such days--everyone scurrying for shelter. In the
office one is warm from the knees up, but the floor is cold. Hot bricks
for the feet would be a comfort.

It is hard to warm the two houses, St. Joseph's House and Mary's House.
We use either kerosene or the open fireplaces. The latter is more
healthy but it is hard to work with. In these old houses the ground
floor door is always left open, a gale of wind blows up through the
hall. Even when the windows are nailed shut and the cracks stuffed (it
always reminds me of happy days in a cold spring sitting on a beach,
caulking a boat) it is still cold.

When Carol, mother of little Eric, grimly said that it took her all day
to watch the fire, I was reminded again of the beach, those years before
THE CATHOLIC WORKER, when driftwood gathering was the most important
part of the days--when we used to look at each other and say ominously,
"The wind is rising," and all visitors were called upon to gather wood.

And I cannot speak of the beach without thinking of Teresa. She said
this morning on her daily postcard, "We had a swell time at Upton, St.
Benedict's Farm, Sunday. We chopped and sawed wood all afternoon, etc."
It was a picnic that the De Bethune Workshop went on, for the
Thanksgiving holiday, and a picnic meant not only the Thanksgiving
feast, but finding a job to do for others. Peter Maurin likes to
emphasize the Christianity inherent in some of our slogans, such as
"What can I do for you?" sometimes with joking truthfulness turned into,
"What can I do you for?"

It certainly is a solution to the world's problems, this idea of looking
around to see what you can do for those around you, a true expression of
the second commandment, and the only way we have of showing our love for
God whom we have not seen, but our love for those whom we do see. "Love
is an exchange of gifts." And "love is the measure by which we shall be
judged."

Please Excuse
===

These moralizings I fall into are for myself--I am just talking to
myself, reminding myself of how simple life is, in a moment when things
seem very complex. So don't mind me. We all reprove each other every so
often for being didactic, preachy, pious, hypocritical, full of rash
judgments. This, then, is part of the perfect joy of living together, of
the common life. One of the healthy correctives, stimulants, incentives,
clarifiers.

It is hard to write editorials these days. The most important issue
being discussed by Fr. Hugo must take the place of the editorial. We
used to write editorials on our neighbors, the weather, the little pear
tree in Tompkins square, a walk on the waterfront, but in these grave
days, such procedure would be flauntingly trivial. Not that we do not
feel it necessary to continue to bring in such atmosphere, for the
"composition of place," as the spiritual writers say. But we do it in
this column, and on the farm page. We do not mind being personal--that
is, most of us with the journalistic sense do not because we recognize
that we are anonymous in our universality.

Gossip
===

Always there are changes these days in all our houses and groups around
the country. People being scattered in all directions, what with the
war.

Peter Clark, who has had charge of the coffee line in the morning for so
long, is working in Baltimore, and Franklin Smith, one of the boys who
was in charge of the Baltimore House of Hospitality (which is closed) is
with us running the coffee line and taking care of the clothes. Now we
have only about four hundred in the morning for the line, and about a
hundred for lunch and two hundred for supper. It is hard to be exact, as
it is a shifting population. At any rate it has gone way down in
numbers.

Joe Zarrella has been accepted by the American Field Service, and Louis
Murphy, head of the Detroit Catholic Worker activities (two houses and a
farm) is hanging around in a beautiful AFS uniform waiting to be
shipped, and meanwhile helping both the Field Service and us. Dave
Mason, one of the heads of the Philadelphia Catholic Worker is here with
us, waiting to be called to jail, since he refused induction, objecting
to conscription and refusing to accept it even to the extent of a
conscientious objectors' camp. Carl Paulson, who lives on St. Benedict's
Farm, at Upton, is now at Danbury Federal penitentiary, his status as a
c.o. not being considered proven.

Eddie Bergin, of Dunwoodie Seminary, calls this the gossip column (I pay
him back by mentioning it) and I must justify these mentionings by
saying that our friends and readers all over the country ask for such
news for their encouragement. If we followed the true journalistic
tradition, we would write separate stories, headlined, detached in tone,
impersonal, yet propagandist. We wish to influence people, of course,
but we believe so firmly in vocation that we recognize how the word
"propaganda" came to have its sinister connotations. We print the story
of the women who would not register separately because forty-eight names
are too long for this column, which always is overlong, and to let the
government know beforehand our point of view. Most of us cannot go to
Washington to testify before the senate military committee, or the
hearings on the manpower bill.

As to the fewness of our numbers, forty-eight are far more than twelve,
that holy, significant number. As Silone said, one voice crying out
against injustice breaks the unanimity of the acceptance of that
injustice.

"Extremism Again"
===

We have many friends among the seminarians around the country and a few
weeks ago one of them wrote me from the middle west. "The general
attitude on Pacifism? The attitude is mainly unfavorable. The ones who
answer most strongly say in the main that Pacifism is the changing of a
counsel to a precept--that it is the ideal for the Christian but may not
be imposed as an obligation. The rest are pretty much swept along by the
tide of friends and relatives who are fighting and by the solid fact to
which they cling--the Japanese attack last December. All criticism of
the Catholic Worker attitude on war is tempered by the stout
qualification that the CW's know how to bring Christian charity to the
man in the street."

We ought to keep on writing about counsels and precepts each time we
hear such an objection.

Means and Ends
===

Fr. Hugo says that the precept is the end, the counsels the means to
that end. He gave us a conference on the subject at one of our retreats
with him. The counsels (of poverty, chastity and obedience) are looked
upon as the best means to the end toward which we are all obliged to
aim, perfection.

As to our obligations, to make perfection our end, Pope Pius XI said in
his encyclical on St. Francis de Dales, "The Lord Himself declared it
when he said, 'Be ye therefore perfect, as your Heavenly Father is
perfect.' Let none think that this as addressed to a select few and that
others are permitted to remain in an inferior degree of virtue. The law
obliges, as is clear, absolutely everyone in the world without
exception." (Acta Stae, Sed., Vol. XV, P. 50.)

Fr. Hugo went on to say, quoting St. Thomas, that in the order of
intention, we must aim at perfection. In the order of execution, if we
tried faithfully to correspond to the graces we receive, the Lord would
take into account our weakness and infirmity and we need not worry about
measuring spiritual progress.

He used the simile of a gunner aiming at a city. The gunner takes into
consideration the lay of the land, the velocity of the wind and shoots
high over his mark in order to reach it at all. If we do not aim high,
we will reach nowhere.

As to the counsels--poverty, chastity and obedience--Fr. Joseph Woods of
Portsmouth Priory has pointed out in various conferences of his, that at
different times in our lives we are under obligation to practice the
counsels, and the counsel of chastity we are to practice at all times.
Strange though it seems, people confuse abstinence with chastity.
Married people must be chaste according to their state in life.

The soldier must practice obedience to a much greater agree than the
civilian, but the civilian is also expected to be obedient to lawful
authority. The child is expected to be obedient to the parent. These are
the precepts for them.

So little attention has been paid to the precept of obedience that
totalitarianism is the result--an over emphasis on the idea of
authority. Plenty is being written today about authority and freedom,
not only because of the state of the world, but because of the state of
the home, the school.

I thought as I read the seminarian letter, "We expect so much of men of
God. We expect them not to judge men, yet not to uphold the lesser means
such as resorting to force to make social change, or to defend oneself.
And certainly not to uphold such means as blockades, bombardment of open
cities, etc. Have the men of God taken to upholding the arm of the
state, justifying the state? We expect men of God to cry out against the
iniquities of war, to mitigate the horrors of war, as Pope Pius
beseeched in the Spanish conflict. We do not expect them to be upholding
the modern shambles of war. Nor do the army men. It is the state which
again and again uses the Church.

From the letters we have received throughout the country from men in the
service, what they wish to hear are the words of a St. John, high and
clear above

the combat, "My little children, love one another." Even the words of
Christ Himself, pleading with them to remember His counsels.

And indeed they hear these words, but they do not hear them from the
bishops, their shepherds. No, they hear in the depths of their hearts,
the call to prayer. There is an account of such an incident in Time
magazine of last week, of soldiers caught helpless in the midst of an
inferno of battle saying the Lord's Prayer.

Our Father
===

Thy Kingdom come! And they know as they pray that His Kingdom will not
be coming by such means as they are using.

Thy will be done. And it is certainly not His will, this war, nor does
it come from doing His will.
