% On Pilgrimage - July 1955
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1955, 3.

*Summary: An account of moving everything from Maryfarm in Newburgh to
Peter Maurin Farm on Staten Island and the birth of Tamar's seventh
child, Martha. (DDLW \#240).*

During the two months since the last issue of the Catholic Worker came
out, the great move from Newburgh, Maryfarm, to Peter Maurin Farm,
Staten Island, has been accomplished and all the men have been housed
and settled, and the furniture is still being sorted out and spread
around. Fr. Faley is in his own quarters, with his own furniture, and
with the additional comfort of windows facing north and south, so that
he has had a little breeze these torrid days of July. Philip is in the
dormitory. Joe Roche and Jim the carpenter have a room next to Fr.
Faley's, then there is Hans's ship's cabin, and next to him a room at
one end of the carpenter shed for John Fillinger who in this month has
made hay, milked the cows, tended the vegetables and built a shed for
the hay and machinery in back of the other farm buildings. It is all on
a small scale, compared to Maryfarm, but we are all together and we are
near the heart of the work, which is Chrystie street. Joe Cotter has his
private room in a converted chicken coop down behind the stone tool
house, a little room which was occupied in the past by Emily Scarborough
one summer, and Hector Black (who is now with the Society of Brothers)
for a two week's retreat a few summers ago. Chickens and rabbits have
also lived there since. Bill and Mike have a room in back of the chapel,
and the dormitory on either end of the barn accommodates the others. All
in the house are women except Stanley who has himself and his press in a
cubby hole of a room, with a low ceiling which makes it hot in summer,
and with no connection with the furnace, which makes it cold in winter.
Stanley saved us from being burnt up one night last month, when one of
the women smelled smoke and called him and he went downstairs to find
the couch in flames. No more overstuffed furniture in the
dining-room-library where cigarettes can fall between the cushions and
smolder. Three bookcases now take the place of the couch, and are far
more useful.

Great News
----------

After the jail, after the moving, after we had all settled down getting
straightened out, Tamar quietly proceeded to have her seventh baby, with
neatness and dispatch as she usually does. I had gone over to her home,
a mile away to spend the night for the first time, now that the last of
six truck loads had come down from Maryfarm and the moving was all but
done. Fr. Faley had said his first Sunday Mass that morning, the heat
had been broken that afternoon by a great thunder and lightning storm
during which Prasse's barn next door was struck by lightning. John and
the men rushed over to help save the herd of pedigreed goats from the
blazing barn, and the Hennessy children and Paul Yamamoto and the
Scarpuli's who were spending the afternoon at the farm all stood by in
fascinated horror. When I took the Hennessys home that night Dave had to
go to work on the graveyard shift, from eleven until seven the next
morning. "You'd better stay, " Tamar told me.

It was a little after midnight that she called me, and with Vicenza
Baglioni coming over from Peter Maurin farm to stay with the rest of the
children, we got down to the little hospital in Princess Bay just in
time. Martha was born at one thirty Monday morning, July 11^th^ and is
being baptized on the feast of St. Martha.

It has been a happy time these past two weeks, staying with the
children. Tamar felt so well she was able to come home on Thursday
morning after three days in the hospital. It was hard to keep her down
but by applying herself to making a hooked rug she was able to keep
quiet for a week.

In the two months since the paper came out last there has been Fr.
Casey's annual retreat, the picketing and the arrest and the experience
of three police courts and two detention houses, the move from Maryfarm
and the birth not only of my grandchild, but also of two other babies at
Peter Maurin farm, and finally the death and burial at Calvary, of our
old friend Fr. John Cordes. May he rest in peace. He had been sick for
years, but confined to the hospital for the last year, and his death
came as a result of a heart attack and was a surprise to us all. We ask
the prayers of our readers for him.
