% Distributism Is Not Dead
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1956, 4.

*Summary: Reaffirms the distributist economic vision of property and
work against critics while acknowledging "It needs to be constantly
rewritten, re-assessed, restatedâ€¦" Comments on Chesterton and Dickens in
relation to renewing distributism. (DDLW \#244).*

The very fact that people are always burying distributism is evidence of
the fact that it is not dead as a solution. John Stanley buried it last
year in the **Commonweal** and **Social Justice** of the Central Verein
in St. Louis some months ago buried it. But it is an issue that won't be
buried, because distributism is a system conformable to the needs of man
and his nature.

We write of farming communes as an ideal form of institution towards
which we should aim, and for which we should plan and we will continue
to write about those which are in existence today in a continuing
attempt as a way of living. We feel that there are ways of combating the
servile state, and working towards a restoration of property.

During those months there was an exchange of visits between Soviet
farmers to this country and some of our farmers to the U.S.S.R. there
were some very interesting newspaper accounts. One of our Iowa farmers
visited some large scale collective farms where 5,000 or so Russians
were employed by the State in spite of the fact that they were using
modern machinery. This was a collective farm, but each family was
allotted anywhere from half an acre to two acres, and on this small plot
they had their own cow and chickens and pigs, and raised such an amount
of vegetables, that it was due to their efforts that so much foodstuffs
were able to go on the market. The cities would be hard put to find the
foods they needed, were it not for these smaller plots.

At the same time one would feel that communal farming of such vast
acreage as there is in the Soviet Union and the United States would not
be out of place in the raising of wheat and flax and cotton and fruits
and other such stuffs that demand large acreage and in some cases many
men employed.

Here in the U.S. we have our migrant laborers, millions of them, to
harvest the crops, and they live ill-fed, ill-clad, ill-housed and are
definitely a problem in our economy. In Russia they seem to be
stabilized. The very mention of such numbers would indicate that there
could be no speed up, though planting and harvest time necessarily mean
long hours, from dawn to dark, with corresponding shorter hours and
lighter toil in winter.

I've been told on farms I have visited in my trips around the country
that winter is just as hard as summer for the individual farmer, since
the animals have to be fed more often (not having the grazing they do in
the summer) and the work is done under the difficult conditions of the
cold and dark, with fewer laborers.

Governor Harriman talked of poverty being a national problem and he was
doubtless thinking of migrants, and Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, and Negroes
and our city and country slums. Labor leaders have talked of pockets of
unemployment. Where industry has moved south, or to another town there
is great fanfare over enterprising real estate men who buy up the
factories and invite other diversified industries to take over. With all
our prosperity there is still the specter of unemployment.

But on the land, as Peter Maurin always said, there is no unemployment.
There is food, clothing, shelter, and fuel and work to do. Proof of this
is in spite of our poverty and pockets of unemployment, is the fact that
in all the 23 years of the Catholic Worker, only one farmer has come to
us, and that was John Filliger, who was a seaman during the 1936 strike,
who seeing our need, stayed with us. There is the saying, "Scratch a
seaman and you will find a farmer."

In the New World Chesterton series published by Sheed and Ward, the
volume **Tremendous Trifles** has an essay called The Dickensian. Our
readers will remember that G. K.'s Weekly championed Distributism and
his two books, **What's Wrong with the World** and Outline of Sanity are
basic Volumes to read on Distributism, together with **The Sun of
Justice**, by Harold Robbins, his friend.

In this essay, The Dickensian, Chesterton and a stranger meet on a
little pleasure boat crawling up Yarmouth Harbor. The stranger is
mourning the passing of good old things like the wooden figureheads on
ships and he prowls around the old parts of the town looking for traces
of Dickens in Yarmouth. During the course of the afternoon they visit a
church and there is a stained glass window which was flaming "with all
the passionate heraldry of the most fierce and ecstatic of Christian
Arts," there was the angel of the resurrection. Chesterton dashed out of
the church, dragging his friend after him, to buy as he said, ginger
beer, postal cards, to listen to the concertinas, to ride on a donkey.
And when the Dickens enthusiast all but decided Chesterton needed to be
committed to a mental hospital, the latter explains:

"There are certain writers to whom humanity owes much, whose talent is
yet of so shy or retrospective a type that we do well to link it with
certain quaint places, or certain perishing associations." And he went
on to say that were Dickens living today, he would not be harking back
to the past, but dealing with things just as he found them. So that he,
Chesterton, was being particularly Dickensian by enjoying his
surroundings as they were, and beginning from there.

It is the same with Distributism. It needs to be constantly rewritten,
re-assessed, restated, with the wisdom and clear-sightedness of a
Chesterton who by his paradoxes, made us see our lives and our problems
in the light of Faith, who can help us today to make a synthesis of
Cult, Culture and Cultivation.

In spite of the nuclear age we are living in, we can plant our gardens
even if they are only window boxes, we can awaken ourselves to God's
good earth and in little ways start going out on pilgrimage, to the
suburbs, to the country, and when we get the grace, we may so put off
the old man, and put on Christ, that we will begin to do without all
that the City of man offers us, and build up the farming commune, the
Village, the "city" of God, wherein justice dwelleth.
