% All In a Day
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, Oct 1933, 5, 6.

*Summary: Commentary on a parade for labor organizing, labor leaders,
strikes around the country, and advertising to increase consumption.
Recommends voluntary sacrifices and gifts to the poor. Suggests study
clubs use the Gospels, a newspaper, and Papal encyclicals for their
material. (DDLW \#272).*

There is column after column in the news about the NRA parade, which
lasted from one-thirty in the afternoon until almost midnight. We should
have been in it, but there was too little time to organize our forces.
With two people doing everything in the office of The Catholic Worker,
days are crowded enough. Our hours are from nine in the morning to
eleven at night often, and we regret we are unable to sign a code as to
hours or wages.

I took the time, however, to go up to Fifth Avenue and Forty-second
Street at four o'clock in the afternoon to see the crowds. Forty-second
Street from Times Square over to the avenue was jammed with spectators,
many of them walking in the middle of the street. Bryant Park, which is
beginning to be built up again after having been taken away way from the
people (there is a story of city graft here) looks like a large vacant
lot. Slabs of stone along the sidelines look like fallen tombstones.
Women and children were sitting picknicking in the park though it was
closed off, and the police were so busy on the Avenue that they let them
be. The grass was high in some places and ragged boys played as if they
were out on the quiet prairies.

Poor Mayor O'Brien got a lot of booing from the stock exchange on
account of his tax program, and due to confusion in the parade-traffic
the booers were able to keep it up for eighteen minutes. Why should one
man be made the goat?

Every now and then some woman fainted in the melee and a motorcycle
policeman put her in his little basket on the side and sped away with
her dropping over the side and looking to be in imminent danger of a
broken neck.

It may be indelicate to mention it, but we are afraid the people who
were unwinding rolls of toilet paper from office windows at Fifth Avenue
and Forty-second Street were showing just as hostile a spirit as the
booers of Mayor O'Brien. In fact, we are inclined to believe that they
might have been motivated by a bolshevik spirit. Page the D.A.R. and
Hamilton Fish.

## \* \* \*

At the same time my daily paper tells me that R. P. Lamont is resigning
from the Steel and Iron Institute and Charlie Schwab, that notorious
enemy of labor, is going to take his place. Ham Fish might get after
Schwab as being one of the causes of Communism in this country. Schwab
has been fighting labor unions for many, many years now, and making
generous gifts to the church at the same time. Wouldn't if be swell if
these gifts were rejected with thanks? I'd rather worship in such a
store as Father Cornelius Ahern officiates in when he says Mass for his
Negro congregations over in Newark than in the finest church in the
world, built with the money sweated from miners and miners' children and
wives. I admit that many such gifts of ill-gotten money are accepted by
priests and sisters who know nothing of the labor situation in this
country and who have never been told. And I admit that the institutions
built with such money, for instance the splendid property and building
down on Staten Island which Schwab donated as an orphanage, are
productive of much good in that they have taken care of countless
thousands of poor children. But how sad and how terrible a thing it is
that some children are sweated and starved and that it is from their
ragged pockets that the money is filched to house the others. Not to
feed them. The good sisters always see to that themselves.

[As we go to press the papers state that Schwab will not succeed Lamont,
but the above comment may still be pertinent.--Ed,]

## \* \* \*

"Germans to pare one meal a month to feed jobless," is another headline.
Yesterday, while I wandered around town to view the parade, I was
disheartened at the sight of so many women in the tea shops and luncheon
places, spending so much money on so little, and eating so many
unnecessary things when so many are going hungry. It wouldn't hurt any
of them to practice *agere contra*when they are tempted to indulge in an
orgy of sweets. The Germans are going to pare one meal a month off their
diet. Why can't we go them one better, or four better, and pare off one
meal a week and give that money to charity? Or not even one meal, but
one afternoon tea, which usually comes to fifty or sixty cents.

## \* \* \*

General Johnson says (I am still reading the day's news), "As for the
American Federation of Labor. . . we realize that they represent only a
small proportion of all the workers whose rights it is our duty to
conserve. They represent workers only to the extent that workers choose
them for that function."

Much as I deplore the dual-union idea which the A.F. of L. has been
fighting for years, I hope that this remark of Johnson's indicates that
the Progressive Miners of Illinois, who have been fighting the United
Miners for years on the grounds of corrupt leadership, will be
recognized by the Administration.

## \* \* \*

I am still on the front page of the *Times*, and it is giving me great
opportunity for editorial comment. Also by this column I am indicating
what I consider to be the best way to work in a study club. Just take
the Gospels, a newspaper, the Papal encyclicals, and get to work.

On the next column there is discussion of retail codes, a section of
which bars "inaccurate advertising." This leads to another training of
thought, as to how advertising is responsible for much misery today. Our
Holy Father advocates thrift, but is it thrifty to be taken in by
advertisements? Isn't there an element of greed in the desire to have,
for instance, new linoleums, electric refrigerators, new radios, new
cars? The poorest of the poor are taught to spend their money on these
things when their actual subsistence is so insecure that they never know
when they buy a thing on the instalment plan whether they are going to
have a job six months hence so that they can continue paying for it. Why
not a little more of the Franciscan ideal of holy poverty? Who not a
little more disdain of the unnecessaries of life? Food, clothing and
shelter -- these are necessaries. And if we have these we can see our
way clear to studying for a better social order by which we may obtain
those other, we admit, delightful unnecessaries.

When we talk of speculation, it isn't only the bankers on Wall Street
who fall into that category. It is also every man who speculates in the
future of his children by an avid desire to have what the other fellow
has.

Of course, in this we are going against the N R A, which calls for faith
and more buying. Why not faith and more charity -- that is, giving to
the poor to enable them to buy?

There is a great advertising campaign on now. Buy now because prices are
going up. Owen D. Young, on page four of the *Times* says: "Capital
which over-reaches for profits, labor which over-reaches for wages, or a
public which over-reaches for bargains will all destroy each other. . .
There should be earnings enough to pay not only a living wage but a
cultural wage. . . Often behind an apparent bargain lurks a threat to
somebody's savings, or somebody's labor, or to the buyer himself in a
skimped product."

## \* \* \*

Johnson says Ford is observing the code and as long as he does no steps
will be taken. So the precedent has been set of one person holding out
for rugged individualism. Not so good. But then I heard the other day of
a bank president who told a friend of ours that he flew the blue eagle
for business purposes and that anyone can get around the agreements who
wanted to. That bank president is not only a rugged individualist but a
hypocrite.

## \* \* \*

Thirty-five thousand miners are striking again in Pennsylvania. They
call it a holiday now (sixteen were shot later in the day). The strike
of the miners in Utah and New Mexico has been put in the news at last.
It has been going on for weeks, with thousands out, wholesale arrests of
hundreds, but the capitalist press has ignored it.

A white goods strike of 35,000 going on in and around New York. There is
a silk strike of 60,000 workers in Paterson and Passaic, where the
radical union, the National Textile Workers, is in command of the
situation. Anne Burlak, the leader of the National Textile Workers'
Union, refuses to sit down to arbitrate with Thomas McMahon, of the
United Textile Workers, accusing him of selling out the workers. It is
true that McMahon has sat with bankers and Chamber of Commerce officials
more than he has sat with workers in recent years. It is true he is a
member of the National Civic Federation, which the United Mine Workers
(A.F. of L.) Holds is an enemy of labor. The U.M.W. in its constitution
forbids any member of its organization to be a member of the Federation.
So how does McMahon, also A.F. of L., get that way?

Anne Burlak is apt to have the workers with her, because she is a fine,
strapping young girl, blond-haired, rosy cheeked, looking like a
Valkyrie as she marches at the head of her strikers. She led the Hunger
Marchers down to Washington last year and wherever there is a strike she
rushes to the fore. What she's really out for is a good time, otherwise
she'd work with the established union and do some of the much-needed
organizing work among the southern textile mills, for instance. But she
prefers the obstructionist tactics of the Communist Party.
