% The Listener - October 1933
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, Oct 1933, 7.

*Summary: Miscellaneous musings about child labor, study clubs,
mimeographed newspapers issued by altar boys. (DDLW \#274).*

Although we have seen many copies of mimeographed papers put out by
zealous Communist young people, the first one we have seen done by
Catholics was brought in to us by Edwin F. Britton. It is called *The
Magnet*, and is "a monthly published by the altar boys of Our Lady of
Guadalupe Council of the Knights of the Divine Child, to inspire
Catholic Action." Its editor is Mr. Britton, who does the hard work of
mimeographing it every month, devoting his evenings to the work, for he
is employed during the day in a jewelry store. The motto of the paper
is, "We want a Daily Press." It is an eight-page paper with a bright
rose cover, attractively made up and containing stories, editorials,
jokes and poems. The copy he showed us was Volume 3, No. 24. This is a
splendid piece of neighborhood action and we earnestly advise other
young Catholics in schools and parishes to follow Mr. Britton's example.
He said if anyone wanted to find out how it can be done to call on him
or write to him at 256 West 15th Street.

## ****

We refer study clubs and schools who want literature on international
peace to the Catholic Association for International Peace, 1312
Massachusetts Avenue NW., Washington, D.C. Miss Sweeney there will
advise as to pamphlets and leaflets and study club outlines for classes.

## ****

Miss Kelley, a high school teacher and a member of the Teacher's Union,
dropped into our office last month and was telling us about the
activities of the Communists in the Union, and their tactics of
prolonging meetings until everyone is so exhausted that they have
control of the situation and can carry things their way. She was urging
that every Catholic teacher join the Union in order to fight Communist
teachers in the public schools.

Another Catholic teacher says that there are several teachers'
organizations and that it is hard to belong to all of them and to pay
dues to all of them.

Miss Kelley also told about working some years ago in a summer school,
having the afternoon sessions, and about a little boy who always came to
school so tired that he fell asleep at his desk. She investigated and
found that he was working in a laundry as a sorter from seven to eleven
so that he arrived at school in a state of exhaustion. She informed the
proper authorities of the case and the little boy was able to give up
his grueling work.

## ****

We have found a good and enthusiastic friend in Mollie Callanan, of
Buffalo, New York, who heard about the paper up at the Cenacle of St.
Regis and came down to see us. She immediately volunteered to help us
and took papers down to Wall Street to distribute after the talks there.
Another day she arrived at the office to get copies to distribute in
Union Square. She had heard of Dorothy Weston's experience in the Square
when she went to distribute papers in preparation for the meeting of the
unemployed. Dorothy had been set upon and argued with (and to argue with
her the Communists found it necessary to grab her by both arms, so she
was almost torn limb from limb) and when she extricated herself from the
milling mob, most of whom wanted copies of the paper and some half dozen
of whom wanted to prevent the others from taking it, she found her chic
nose veil ripped from its moorings and askew over one eye. Mollie
declared herself ready for anything, but on the day set for her
appearance in Union Square it poured rain and she had to forego her
apostolate to the Communists, for this visit to New York at least.

We got an invigorating letter from her on her return to Buffalo in which
she tells us of a Sister Fabian, "a live-wire nun who is moving
mountains in a quiet way." We enjoyed the mixed metaphors.

## ****

Our friend J. Lehane of Long Island City came in during the month with
another union man, both of them offering to serve in eviction cases,
help to move furniture, or assist The Catholic Worker in any way they
could. We talked of the railroad -- he belongs to the Brotherhood of
Railway Clerks -- and Mr. Lehane pointed out that if more men had been
employed on the railroads, the Erie wreck, where so many were killed
last month, would not have occurred.
