% Day by Day Account of Editor's Travels Thru West and North
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1935, 1, 2.

*Summary: Tells of a long bus trip and talks in New York, Chicago,
Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Canada. Is impressed with the work of Virgil
Michel at St. John's College in Minnesota where he has started a school
of social studies--"the theory of the personalist revolution must be
studied." (DDLW \#295).*



** Large Audiences Testify to Widespread Interest in Paper; Campion Groups
are Formed. **

Started on a long trek west early on a Sunday morning. The bus was
packed and just across from me were two Russians. I know their
nationality by the fact that they were breakfasting on black bread
soaked in vodka. They poured the liquor carefully on their bread and ate
with gusto, and having finished this appetizer, they proceeded to
consume smoked salmon on onion rolls and dill pickles. The smell was
delightful. (I mean it, too.)

## \*\*\*

An outstanding example of personal responsibility and hospitality which
we found in Rochester was Mrs. L.A. Weider. She lives on the outskirts
of the town, in Brighton, and told us with enthusiasm of the hundreds of
quarts of berries she picked this summer from her few acres, the jars of
beans, etc., she was able to do up.

She has always gone on the principle that what one had, one must share.
She has six children, and a few grand children, and she has recently
adopted another child. She has gone in for hospitality in a big way, and
she hereby invites any and all of the Catholic Workers to stay with her
whenever they are in Rochester or passing through.

"Even if I have to sleep on the floor myself," she said, "And many a
time I've done it. We've had this house for nine years, but before that
we had very little space and we often had to give up our beds to
others."

Mrs. Weider is aiming to pay The Catholic Worker a visit in New York and
spend all her time cooking for us. Just yesterday, she said, she cooked
three turkeys and a great dinner for a church affair, and she would like
nothing better than to arrange a menu for the Catholic Worker community.

## \*\*\*

Traveled all day from Rochester to Cleveland. The grape country through
New York state is beautiful and one rest stop by the side of a brook was
memorable for its beauty. There was a delicious silence after the
constant noise of travel, and it was a silence only broken by the
tinkling of the little stream over pebbles as it made its way through
the vineyards.

## \*\*\*

In Cleveland I was shaken out of my bed by the earthquake. The hotel I
put up in right near the bus terminal was a tall narrow one and I was on
the top floor. I was awakened by a fearful clattering of the
windowpanes, the truly terrible noise of the elevator cables clanging,
and the smaller but just as ominous a noise of coat hangers clashing
together in the closet. The whole hotel rocked as though it were in a
high wind, and from all the rooms terrified occupants rushed out in
their night clothes, all the way down into the lobby. If it had not been
for the distraction offered by "Out of the Whirlwind" by Wm. Joseph
Walsh, an engrossing novel, I should have been hard put to it for the
rest of the night to sleep. As it was I stayed up until three reading
and then was able to fall asleep. Many of the theatrical people staying
in the hotel remained up over night, afraid to go back to bed.

Mass at St. John's cathedral in the morning -- All Saints Day.

In Chicago the next night just long enough to sleep, and assist at a six
o'clock mass at St. Mary's. The bus left at 7:30 and the trip through
the lake country was delightful. I saw cabins chinked with plaster, one
of them with the cooking utensils hanging on the outside as in Mexico.

A group of students from the Newman club who make up the Campion
Propaganda committee of that section met me late in the evening when we
pulled in and put me up over night. S poke the next morning at St.
Paul's Seminary where Mr. Neudecker has long been a Catholic worker.
These young men will be priests who have rural parishes all through the
north here, and we pray that they will further the rural life movement.

## \*\*\*

Leaving St. Paul the next morning the rain turned to snow which
continued all day, making the roads slippery and skiddy. The bus had to
proceed slowly and we enjoyed the stormy trip. A young man sat next to
me, Francis Sullivan by name, who was going out to North Dakota to work
on the power lines. We conversed on The Catholic Worker and its aims.
The bus took on and let off farmers clad in mackinaws, high boots and
pull down caps.

## \*\*\*

Late at night we arrived at Grand Forks, North Dakota, where Father
Arrell met me and took me to the hospital of the Sisters of St. Joseph,
where I met with kind hospitality. I spoke the next evening at the town
hall, where a dozen Communists enlivened the meeting by many questions,
most of them dealing with fascism and the united front. The Newman Club
of the University of North Dakota sponsored this meeting, and some of
the young men there have formed themselves into a Campion group. Among
the seven there is one Philippine boy, which makes twenty-three
nationalities among us.

Father Arrell, who teaches ethics in the university, has long done
splendid work among the students, circulating weekly leaflets and
sponsoring a drama group which puts on a Passion play every year. This
year they are going to have two companies, one of them touring the
state. Last year seventy people took part, fifteen of them making up a
Capella choir. It is a hobby of Father Arrell to collect Passion plays.

## \*\*\*

Set out at 11:30 o'clock that night to reach Winnipeg at four the next
morning, where Mrs. Jordan and daughter, Father Mac-Isaac and Mr.
Tonkin, head of the lecture bureau, met me at that early hour. A great
deal of distribution of The Catholic Worker has already been done among
the workers in this city during the past six months, and a Campion group
is formed here for distribution of leaflet and for propaganda work.

While in Winnipeg I was the guest of the Sisters of the Holy Names of
Jesus and Mary, who have done much pioneer work through the Northwest.

## \*\*\*

St. John's College, in Minnesota, is a most impressive place. The
monastery is the largest in the world, sending out missionaries all over
the country. I was the guest of Father Virgil Michel there and yesterday
morning he showed me all over the place. It started with just a few
monks and now they have a tremendous plant. We visited the kitchens,
where the German Franciscan nuns take care of the needs of the community
and college; the flour mill, where the grain from their own acres is
ground; the butcher shop and the herds of steers and pigs, and barns
where there are eighty cows; and the Liturgical press, which we make
good use of back in New York. I spoke there to the students, seminarians
and faculty, and they want Peter Maurin to come out and spend a week
with them.

Social Studies
--------------

Father Virgil has started a school of social studies at St. John's which
takes up such subjects as war and peace, the state, labor and money.
Since, as Lenin says, there can be no revolution without a theory of
revolution, we hold it equally true that the theory of the personalist
revolution must be studied in order that the ideas may be disseminated
all over the country. And men will act according to the way they think
and their thinking will be influenced by the teachers who come from St.
John's.

St. Benedict's College for Women is just four miles away, and there I
met our old friend Bishop Busch and was very happy to see him again. I
visited the department where Gothic vestments are made and the sisters
promised to contribute to our needs when we have our farming commune
started and are able to build a chapel. The sisters here are also very
appreciative of the work of Peter Maurin; I was able to promise them a
visit from him in February.

## \*\*\*

Right now I am in Minneapolis, where we have long had many friends.
Tomorrow I shall set out for La Crosse, where there is a conference of
the editors of college papers and where I will meet David Host from
Marquette, who spent a month with us last summer in new York, and Nina
Polcyn, who accompanied us to the scene of the Bremen riot and who fled
with me down the street when the police were cracking heads in all
directions.

Home Again
----------

The above copy was sent back but did not arrive in time for the November
issue of the paper.

To complete the story of the trip I talked about The Catholic Worker,
its aims and purposes in La Crosse, Milwaukee, Niagara falls, Ottawa and
Montreal before arriving back in New York. There were friends everywhere
and many of these friends were anxious to associate themselves with the
Campion Propaganda Committee and help the paper in the communities in
which they lived.

Not the least interesting part of the trip was the bus-riding and the
friends made during the long fifteen-hour trips from city to city.

Between Cleveland and Chicago there was a Negro friend who had been
raised in St. Mark's parish, New York, and was moving to Chicago, where
he had no friends. "He had been a Catholic," he said. And that he might
still be a Catholic, we passed him on in Chicago to Dr. Falls, our
Midwest correspondent.

Then in Canada there was that copper miner on his way through from
Saskatchewan to Nova Scotia, and we talked of co-operatives, and the
Catholic philosophy of labor, and he asked that the paper be sent to him
and to friends back in Winnipeg.
