% Catholic Worker Celebrates 3rd Birthday; A Restatement of C. W. Aims and Ideals
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1936, 1, 6.

*Summary: Restatement of core Catholic Worker ideals regarding private
property, class war, interracial relations, atheism, Marxism, fascism,
Communism, materialism, and the role of the state. (DDLW \#300).*

With this the fourth anniversary number of The Catholic Worker, it is
proper again to state our stand and our opposition to the industrial
system, to military preparedness, to interracial injustice.

We are writing as Catholics and as Americans. We do not believe that the
two positions are incompatible.

We are accused by false conservatives who do not know what they want to
conserve, of being Communists. And we are accused by Communists of being
Fascists.

So we restate our position and the positions of both the communist and
the fascist-minded opponents.

Private Property
----------------

Communists believe in State Socialism as a step to Communism.

We believe in widespread private property, the de-proletarianizing of
our American people. We believe in the individual owning the means of
production, the land and his tools. We are opposed to the "finance
capitalism" so justly criticized and condemned by Karl Marx but we
believe there can be a Christian capitalism as there can be a Christian
Communism.

Class War
---------

The Communist believes in the necessity of achieving State Socialism by
class war. ("How are you going to convert the wicked capitalist, the
speculator, the banker?" he says. And *his* answer is "by liquidating
them".)

We believe in using the following means: Indoctrination by using all the
propaganda means at our disposal: by the individual practice of the
works of mercy: by farming communes which will provide work for the
unemployed and leadership for those who are anxious to undertake the job
of building up a new social order.

Atheism
-------

The Communist is Atheist. "Atheism is an integral part of Marxism" Lenin
says.

We believe that we are all members or potential members of the mystical
Body of Christ, and that we must show that faith by translating the
spiritual into the material. *All* men are our brothers, Jew or Gentile,
white or black, since God created us *all* and since His Son died to
atone for the sins of *all* men. Since Christ is our Brother, *all* men
are our brothers, the communist, fascist, the red baiter and the
"capitalist."

We oppose the "finance capitalism" of the American industrial system
because it is as truly materialistic and hence atheistic as Marxism. And
we believe that only Fascism which denies all human liberty can keep it
alive.

We are opposed to "social planning" because it will lead to servitude,
and because we believe with R. H. Tawney (whose books Peter Maurin has
been recommending to our readers since the first issue) that "society is
a spiritual organism and not an economic machine."

Not Red-baiting
---------------

We believe that all the hundreds of thousands of workers marching
throughout the industrial centers today are justly criticizing the
present social order as debasing and degrading.

We believe that they are braver and more honest men and women than those
large masses of indifferent and comfortable materialists who close their
eyes to the misery and degradation of the American people, or those
others, the rabid red-baiters who, in opposing the communist solution,
uphold the present materialist system.

Messiahs
--------

We do not believe that sharing the wealth, a reformed monetary system
alone, old age pensions and epic plans are practical or fundamental. We
do not believe that legislation is going to bring us out of the morass
we are floundering in.

We do believe that the problem before us of working for a social order
in which the way of life will enable man to save his soul, is a moral
one that must engage the minds and energies of all Catholics.

Americans
---------

All Americans indeed should wake to reality, and in recalling what
Thomas Jefferson stood for in the minds of his countrymen, look around
them and contemplate the state we are in today. This issue of the paper
is carrying stories of conditions throughout the world.

Inasmuch as we do not concern ourselves with such conditions, we are
responsible for them.

"Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of them Ye have done it unto
Me," Christ said.
