% For the New Reader
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1936, 6.

*Summary: Restatement of core Catholic Worker beliefs, distinguishing
them from Fascism, Communism, and capitalism. Emphasizes voluntary,
private, and personal action to improve the social order. (DDLW \#310).*

THE CATHOLIC WORKER is strongly anti-Fascist because Fascism denies that
man has a higher obligation than his obligation to the State, because
Fascism believes that man is made for the State and denies that the
State is made for man, because, although it believes and acts on these
principles, as is apparent in Italy and Germany, it *pretends* to
recognize religious, political, and economic rights, and is therefore
more dangerous in many ways than the open enmity of Communism.

THE CATHOLIC WORKER is insistently anti-Communist, in spite of all you
may have heard to the contrary, because Communism claims that "man lives
by bread alone"; deifies comfort; denies religious, political, and
economic freedom, though not as frankly as it did once; has replaced the
capitalist and aristocrat with the Communist Party, but still enslaves
and exploits the peasant and the proletariat; is, in short, no better
than State Capitalism.

THE CATHOLIC WORKER is for Christian communism, as practiced in Catholic
monasteries and by the early Christians, as an economy of perfection,
possible only on a *voluntary* basis.

THE CATHOLIC WORKER is anti-capitalist, in the sense that it condemns
the spirit of greed, of rampant materialism, that has become synonymous
with that system and has led to the present abuses in production and
distribution.

THE CATHOLIC WORKER is not opposed to private property, but on the
contrary works for "the restoration of property" through co-operatives,
credit unions, and the back-to-the-land movement. It supports private
ownership of the means of production, except where such ownership is
incompatible with the common good, as in certain public utilities, but
opposes the concentration of productive power in the hands of a few,
because that concentration has almost always been destructive of the
common good.

THE CATHOLIC WORKER is not opposed to "saving for a rainy day" and for
the support of one's dependents, but is more interested in giving, not
only because it is the duty of Christians to give their surplus to the
poor, but also because it is good economics to distribute idle money
among those who will spend it.

THE CATHOLIC WORKER does not condemn any and all war, but believes the
conditions necessary for a "just war" will not be fulfilled today.

THE CATHOLIC WORKER admits the importance of political action, but is
much more interested in the importance of *private* action, in the
creation of order out of chaos.

THE CATHOLIC WORKER admits the importance of public responsibility for
the poor and needy, but is much more interested in the importance of
*personal* responsibility for the hungry, thirsty, naked, homeless,
sick, criminal, afflicted, and ignorant.
