% Who is Guilty of 'Murders' in Chicago?
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July 1937, 1, 4, 7.

*Summary: Blames the press and factory owners for inciting police
violence against strikers. Relates the suffering of those beaten to
Christ's in the garden of Gethsemene. Says we are all guilty for not
protesting. Includes some news from the Easton farm. (DDLW \#323).*

Molders of Public Opinion Guilty with Police and Employers
----------------------------------------------------------

Day After Day
---

Have you ever heard a man scream as he was beaten over the head by two
or four policemen with clubs and cudgels? Have you ever heard the
sickening sound of blows, and seen people with their arms upraised,
trying to protect their faces, stumbling blindly to get away, falling
and rising again to be beaten down? Did you ever see a man, shot in the
back, being dragged to his feet by policemen who tried to force him to
stand, while his poor body crumbled, paralyzed by a bullet in the spine?

We are sickened by stories of brutality in Germany and Russia and Italy.
A priest from Germany told me of one man who came to him whose back was
ridged "like a washboard," by the horrible beatings he had received at
the hands of the German police in concentration camps. I shudder with
horror at the thoughts of the tortures inflicted on Catholics,
Protestants, Jews and Communists in Germany today; at the torture
inflicted on Communists in Russia, and on their children and relatives.

And here in America last month there was a public exhibition of such
brutality, that the motion picture film, taken by a Paramount
photographer in a sound truck, was suppressed by the company for fear
that it would cause riots and mass hysteria, it was so unutterably
horrible.

Police Riot
-----------

I am trying to paint a picture of it for our readers because so many did
not read the story of the Memorial Day "riot" in Chicago in front of the
Republic Steel mills.

Try to imagine this mass of people, men, women and children, picketing,
as they have a right to do, coming up to the police-line and being
suddenly shot into, not by one hysterical policeman, but by many. Ten
were killed and one hundred were taken to the hospital wounded. Tear gas
and clubs supplied by the Republic Steel Company were used.

I am trying to picture this scene to our readers because I have
witnessed these things first hand, and I know the horror of them. I was
on a picket line when the "radical" squad shot into the line and pursued
the fleeing picketers down the streets knocking them down, and kicking
and beating them. I too have fled down streets to escape the brutality
and vicious hatred of the "law" for those whom they consider "radicals."
And to the police anyone who protests injustice, who participates in
labor struggles, is considered a radical.

Two years ago I wrote an account in The Catholic Worker of two plain
clothesmen beating up a demonstrator. I told of the screams and the
crumbling body of the man as two men who had dragged him into a hallway,
beat him up against the wall aiming well directed blows at his face,
smashing it to a pulp.

We protested this to the Police Commissioner and our protest was
respected and acted upon.

Whose Fault
-----------

We are repeating the protest against the Chicago massacre because the
only way to stop such brutality is to arouse a storm of protest against
it.

On whom shall the blame be laid for such a horrible spectacle of
violence? Of course, the police and the press in many cases lay the
blame on the strikers. But I have lived with these people, I have eaten
with them and talked to them day after day, and they are men and women
like you and me, many of them never having been in a strike before, many
of them marching in the picket line as in a supplicatory procession, for
the first time in their lives. They even brought children on that line
in Chicago.

Shall we blame only the police? Or shall we blame just Tom Girdler of
the Republic Steel Company? God knows how he can sleep comfortably in
his bed at night with the cries of those strikers, of their wives and
children, in his ears? He may not hear them now, in the heat of battle,
but he will hear them, as there is a just God.

Or shall we blame the press, the pulpit and all those agencies who form
public opinion, who have neglected to raise up their voice in protest at
injustice and so have permitted it, and in some cases of the press
instigated it so that it would come to pass? Inflammatory, hysterical
headlines about mobs, about expected riots so much to arouse the temper
of the police to prepare them for just what occurred. The calm,
seemingly reasonable stories of such papers as the Herald-Tribune and
the Times, emphasizing the violence, do much to prepare the public to
accept such violence when it comes to pass.

We Share Guilt
--------------

In that case we all are guilty inasmuch as we have not "gone to the
workingman" as the Holy Father pleads and repeats. Inasmuch as we have
not inclined our hearts to him, and sought to incline his to us, so that
we could work together for peace instead of war, inasmuch as we have not
protested such murder as was committed in Chicago--then we are guilty.

One more sin, oh suffering Christ, worker Yourself, for you to bear. In
the garden of Gethsemene you bore the sins of all the world, --you took
them on yourself, the sins of those police, the sins of the Girdlers,
and the Schwabs, of the Graces of this world. In committing them,
whether ignorantly or of their own free will, they piled them on Your
shoulders, bowed to the ground with the weight of the guilt of the
world, which you assumed because You loved each of us so much. You took
them on Yourself, and You died to save us all. Your precious blood was
shed even for that policeman whose cudgel smashed again and again the
skull of that poor striker, whose brains lay splattered on the
undertaker's slab.

And the sufferings of those strikers' wives and children are completing
Your sufferings today.

Have pity on us all, Our Lord of Gethsemene,-- on Tom Girdler, those
police, the souls of the strikers, as well as on all of us who have not
worked enough for a "a new heaven and a new earth wherein justice
dwelleth."

Johnstown
---------

Last month we went down to Johnstown for the special purpose of meeting
Michael Sewak, Burgess of Franklin, a town which borders Johnstown and
in which are four of the most important gates of the Cambria Steel
plant. In Johnstown there are three. The sheriff of Cambria county is
Michael Boyle, the brother of Bishop Boyle of Pittsburgh in whose
diocese the priests in the Catholic Radical Alliance are doing such
noble work on the labor front, in speaking, writing and aiding strikers.

Sheriff Boyle is opposed to the use of force. He does not want tear gas
and guns used against the workingmen of his county. But Mayor Shields of
Johnstown, a heavy jowled, sleek politician, is all for strong-arm
stuff. He glories in the praise he is getting from industrialists all
over the country, and he shamelessly accepts the aid of the Bethlehem
Steel Company in the way of guards, police, and guns, "to keep order" at
the Cambria gates in Johnstown.

Sheriff Boyle and his friend Burgess Sewak were in agreement. Burgess
Sewak had nine policemen, none of them armed and at their gates there
was no trouble, nor rioting. Taxis cruised the streets with armed men.
He refuses to give "protection" to C.I.O. organizers, which is one way
of telling them to get out of town. An*unlawful*way.

Sheriff Boyle was the one who telegraphed Governor Earle of Pennsylvania
to declare martial law in Johnstown in order to curb the activities of
Shields. It was the first time that I ever saw the state troops and the
strikers cheer each other, and not behave like brothers. There is not
much chance that there will be a peaceful waiting and negotiating for an
agreement.

It was good to talk to Burgess Sewak. He lives in a little house up on
the side of a steep hill in one of the worst slums I have ever visited.
Those who talk of the high wages of steel workers should visit Franklin
and see the homes of the workers.

Down in the municipal building he told me about himself. He's been in
office for eight years. He's worked in the steel mills for fourteen. He
is married to a Catholic,-- he is a Greek Catholic, and all his children
are being raised Catholics. All his brothers and sisters have married
Catholics and become Catholics.

"In my household we have two sets of feast days, those of the Greek
Church and those of the Catholic. My wife never forgets. It sure gives a
holiday aspect to our home."

Burgess Sewak as well as Sheriff Boyle are the kind of men we need in
public life in this country. We don't hear much about them in the
papers, because they see that there is law and order maintained. Because
they are maintaining human rights as above property rights. Because they
are trying to prevent bloodshed instead of provoke it as Mayor Shields
and the newspapers which feature him are doing. They are the unsung
heroes.

But labor does not forget, and the community does not forget. Theirs is
an example which other officials might well follow. Sheriff Boyle is a
Catholic. Mayor Shields also calls himself one. You can choose between
them.

On The Farm
-----------

I am writing this month from the farming commune down in Easton and
outside my windows, seven children are sliding down the hill and leaving
a long streak in the yellow grass. The hill rises up over the back of
the house and the old road winds around up to the farm which we own.
This one at the foot of the hill we rent.

Mary, Helena, Catherine, Christina, Annie, Eleanor and Teresa are the
children, and the first five of them are Giogas's, some of Julia's
charges from Harlem. They don't live there any more, their new home is
on Forty-third Street we believe, but Julia follows them around through
the years. They have been her special friends for three years now, ever
since we had quarters up in Harlem. The family have been on relief for
some years, and the mother has been in the hospital for a good part of
the past year. So they need lots of milk and sunlight and fresh air. The
mother and the other four children are coming down later, and probably
the father too.

This farm is ideal for us with its big barns, where the children are
camping out. The boys have our barn,--Ray, Bill, Mike, Donald and any
other company who comes along. There are five more of us besides the
children sleeping in the other barn. And the two bedrooms of the
farmhouse are filled too. Altogether there are about thirty-eight people
down here this week-end and about thirty are here for some weeks.

Every morning a crowd of us go down to Mass in Easton and after Mass I
stay in the Easton office for letters and writing until noon. The
afternoon is spent in more reading and writing and the children.

The bills are all paid, we thank God and our readers, and we are
starting the summer with a goodly supply of groceries from the
Cooperative and a kindly grocer to extend us credit if we run short in
the summer.

It is a happy place, this farm, with its bright sunny days, the heavy
odor of milkweed blossoms coming in the window and the daisies studding
the fields. Every night we have black raspberry shortcake, and there is
all the cherry jam you can eat. Rosie doesn't give quite enough milk to
go around--she's down to twelve quarts a day now, but next summer our
new cow, Mollie, will be giving us more.

(Annie, the little monkey, is climbing on a ladder from the barn, so
I'll cut this short and take the children up the hill to hunt for
salamanders in the spring. In spite of strikes and brutality,
controversy and war, this world is filled with joy and beauty and the
children bring it to us anew and help us to enjoy it through their
eyes.)
