% Valiant Is The Word
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1938, 2.

*Summary: Admires the heroic sacrifice and hard work of Iola Ellis in
helping her sister's daughters get an education. Advocates educational
rights for Negroes so they can become leaders. (DDLW \#332).*

This is the story of Iola Ellis. Mrs. Ellis lives and works in
Cleveland, Ohio. She was born down in Greensboro, Alabama, and went to
public school until she was fourteen. Then she went to Tuskegee
Institute. Her father, a self-educated man, was private secretary to
Governor Slay on a big plantation. When he left the employment of the
Governor he became editor of "The Cotton Farmer," which was published by
the colored tenants of the Delta-Pineland Company in Bolivia County,
Mississippi. Mrs. Ellis assisted her father at his work when she left
school.

When she was eighteen their work was destroyed by the flood. She then
became supervisor of the colored schools of Shelby County, Memphis,
Tenn., and worked there for nine years. She married at the age of twenty
after leaving school.

Lynching
--------

Then there was a lynching in Memphis.

"They cut of the head of the poor dead body and dragged it down Beale
Street," she told me. "The fingers and toes were displayed in the
windows of shops. That was in 1923. My husband could not stand it. He
could not stand the sight of a white man for a while. The horror was too
much for him. We decided to go North."

Determined
----------

After every lynching there is an exodus toward the North.

"So we went north to Cleveland….My mother and father were with us, too.
We had no children and I was helping my sister educate hers. These two
girls came up from the South to live with us. I was determined that they
go through Catholic schools. But I needed employment to help support
them and I kept trying to find a job. I had become a Catholic by then,
and I was praying hard, every day, making novenas and asking our Lord to
help me.

Refused
-------

"But the only job I got was pushing a mop in a police station. I stood
first in the Civil Service examinations for Social Service work in the
City Hospital but I was refused on account of color. So I had to go on
pushing a mop. That is the kind of work that I have continued to do now
for many years."

Prayer
------

"I thought to myself, 'Well, if the Lord answers my prayer that way,
that is probably the work He wants me to do.' So I've been doing it….But
I must confess that every now and then I go and pull a sit-down on the
Lord, when I'm in trouble or out of work, and I say, 'Lord, I'm just
going to sit here until you come and help me.' And He usually does.

"Anyway, when I prayed for a job, I didn't say what kind. So if the Lord
sends me jobs, night work, scrubbing, working at the end of a mop,--it's
a job anyway, and I'll take it."

Hard Time
---------

Dora Bessie and Iona Somerville were the nieces Mrs. Ellis has educated.
She had a hard time getting them into a high school after they had
finished with the parochial school.

But Bishop Schrembs came to her aid; found a school for them and helped
them through it. He didn't stop at the high school, but got them on to
college, too, and now one of them has already graduated from the Notre
Dame Ursuline College and is a substitute teacher in a Cleveland Public
School.

One of the girls is twenty-three and the other nineteen.

New Members
-----------

As I write this story a press release from Communist Party headquarters
has just come through the mail. They speak of the twenty-three thousand
new members which have been enrolled in the Party, fifteen per cent of
them Negroes. I think of the interview I wrote for the **Catholic
Worker**, January issue: an interview with a young Negro girl in New
Orleans who told of Communist recruiting in the little towns in
Louisiana.

Brave Struggle
--------------

Although this little story of Mrs. Ellis, and her brave struggle to
educate her nieces needs no editorial comment, it leads one to meditate
on the necessity of raising up leaders--Negro Catholic leaders.

If, as the Holy Father points out, leaders of working men must be
workers themselves, then most assuredly the leaders of the Negro and the
converters, if one may use that word of the Negro, must be Negroes. And
how many of our Catholic higher schools are opened to the Negro?

Uncompromising
--------------

Mrs. Ellis had to go to the Bishop to get a higher education for her
sister's children. But how many women have the strong spirit, the
uncompromising spirit, of Mrs. Ellis? God love her, valiant champion
that she is of Negro educational rights.
