% To The Workers
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1939, 1, 3.

*Summary: An impassioned appeal to American workers asking them not to
participate in the production of goods which will be used to wage war.
She reminds workers of their power and begs them to unite and again
sacrifice to further international truth and justice, not mass killing
and destruction. (DDLW \#347).*

We address this appeal to the workers of America, you whose sweat and
labor is the lifeblood of our country, you whose blood must flow if the
United States engages in another imperialist war, you whose fellow
workers are now dying for capitalist gain and imperialist ambition in
Europe.

Appeals are being made to your selfishness; you are told that prosperity
will accompany a war boom, that if the United States shall sell to
warring nations or other nations to be transferred to warring countries,
the long awaited lift from unemployment and depression is at hand. Those
who tell you this speak the truth. They know how long you have suffered,
they know the agonizing years have taken toll. And, depending on your
despair, they would make you party to blood profits they hope to make in
a war that is the result of their actions in the past.

Firmly believing in the essential integrity of the American worker, and
his sense of brotherhood with the workers of the world, we address
another appeal; an appeal to your idealism, to your desire for justice,
to your Charity. No matter how the legislative tide turns, no matter
what laws are passed abridging the neutrality of the United States, you
hold it in your power to keep our country aloof from the European war.
This is our appeal, then, that you use your power as workers to refuse
to manufacture or transport articles of war that are intended for
foreign nations, warring or neutral. That you serve notice on your
employers, in organized fashion, that you will have no part of such
blood money, and that you will strike if necessary to maintain your
position.

Will You Do It?
---------------

Is this asking a tremendous sacrifice? We know it is. And yet, it is
necessary sometimes for workers to make overwhelming sacrifices. You
have made them in order that your right to organize, to strike, to
picket, to get a fair share of the profits of industry be recognized.
Hundreds of workers have suffered imprisonment, injury and death, at the
hands of those very people who make war, in order that they and their
work might be accorded the dignity that belongs to them. You do not
think their sacrifices were in vain. You honor and revere the memory of
labor's martyrs. Sacrifice has been labor's lot; it still is. Sacrifice
is always the lot of the noble, and only sacrifice can keep noble what
sacrifice has ennobled.

Have you the courage necessary? You, the steel-workers, the seamen, the
rubber workers, the cotton workers, the chemical workers? Can you, the
steel workers, insist that the industry that is partly yours by virtue
of your work engage only in peaceful pursuits, that the industry devote
itself to the positive program of making only those materials calculated
to build a better society, not wreck the one we have? You can if you
have the capacity for sacrifice that we think you have.

Can you, the seamen, employ the same courage that carried you through
the tumultuous years of organization, the strikes, the long hardships of
picket lines in the dead of winter? You can, you can use the rights you
have won through the suffering and deaths of your fellow seamen, to
enforce a policy of real neutrality for the United States. You have the
capacity for sacrifice, we have seen it; will you use it now in order
that war-mongers do not get the materials they need to kill your fellows
in Europe. There's something greater than mere money bonuses to fight
for. Don't let those who talk unctuously of neutrality by force of arms
fool you into supplying guns and gas to kill and maim your
fellow-workers.

We address all workers in the same vein. It is yours to say whether the
United States shall dip it hands in the blood of European workers. You
can say NO! You can close the plants if necessary. You can proclaim to
the world that at long last the workers are refusing to be the pawns of
capitalist and imperialist gain; that they have searched for truth and
have found it; that you know now that workers' security lies in truth
and justice, so truth and justice will be your aims. Actually, whether
you know it or not, you, the workers, hold in your hands the power to
tip the scales in favor of peace or crime. Are you afraid of your power?
We are waiting for your answer.
