% Day After Day - September 1941
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1941, 1, 3.

*Summary: Describes the Catholic Worker silent retreat at the farm in
Easton, Pennsylvania. Says the retreat is "a course of instruction in
basic principles and tactics"--a time "to gird up the loins and
strengthen oneself for the strong combat." (DDLW \#374).*

Come the Revolution!
===

For two weeks we had been preparing for retreat, and on retreat. For at
least a week we had not looked at the daily paper, nor listened to the
radio (and this is not an editorial "we" but means the whole CW crowd
here in New York and on the farm). Then the other night, Teresa and
Marjorie and I were preparing for bed.

"What's happening in the world," we wondered idly, and asked Teresa to
turn on the radio.

"…free our noble comrade, Earl Browder…war for democracy…war for
religion…traitors like John L. Lewis, the isolationist…" etc., etc.,
etc. And, then to cap the climax, "This is WXYZ, Jersey City"--Frank
Hague's domain!

The revolution is indeed upon us, and we had better prepare to go
underground. There are a few good wine cellars in this house, odorous
and clean. Down at the farm we have a root cellar, very damp, which we
can convert into a priest's hole.

Quiet and Peaceful
===

But most of our Mott Street neighbors don't know about it as yet. Katie
goes on selling plums and pears and finocchi, zucchini and escarole.
Next door the men out in front sit and play cards. The Chinese go on
selling shrimp two doors down, and the good spaghetti in the basement
restaurant next door bears witness to a placid and untroubled mind. The
church bells still ring, beginning at six and going on at intervals
during the days until seven-thirty for night prayers; there are still
holy pictures painted on the wall of the butcher shop around the corner.
September 19th will be the Feast of San Gennaro, and we will look and
feel like a stage setting for *Cavalleria Rusticana*, rather than *Ten
Days That Shook the World.* Strange, the revolution is really going on,
just as we really are in a state of war, and it behooves us to continue
our revolution within the revolution with a renewed vigor.

Retreat
-------

The great news of the month is the retreat (not a retreat from
revolution), held as usual the last week in August at the Catholic
Worker farming commune at Easton. For the benefit of our non-Catholic
readers, a retreat is a retreat from the world, for a little space
only--a retiring to a desert place to renew oneself, to meditate and to
pray, and to listen to conferences.

Father John J. Hugo, of Pittsburgh, who is starting another series of
articles with this issue, was the retreat master. Our readers may
remember his articles on the farm page of the CW some years ago.

This event is the most important work in our lives during the year,
since it gives us strength and energy and light for the coming year. It
is a week of complete silence and prayer, and most of the retreatants
kept the silence. No reading is permitted save the New Testament, and
there are five conferences a day, of one hour each, followed by fifteen
minutes of mental prayer. The day began with a sung Mass, and, thanks to
the leadership of Mary Louise Probst, we all did very well. We had
comfortable chairs, at least more comfortable than the backless benches
we had had the two previous years; and these were the loan of Father
Holahan, our pastor, to whom we also go for many other needs. Sister
Peter Claver and Father Magee from the little Syrian parish in Easton
also helped with the materials needs for the Mass for sixty-five people
all through the week.

Food for the Body
===

Everyone brought food, from cases of milk, meat, bread, rice, hot dogs,
etc., and the garden supplied the rest. Father Joseph Woods says Lent is
the proper time for retreat (and what a long one that is) but then we
would not have the vegetables from the garden, the facilities for
putting people up. Representatives from most of our houses were there,
but, of course, the west coast could not make the trip. Perhaps on my
next visit there we can arrange a retreat, say at Sacramento, to which
our fellow workers in Seattle, Portland, Spokane, San Francisco,
Sacramento, Los Angeles can come.

This year we had an abundance of tomatoes, cabbage, potatoes, onions,
and John Filliger as chief cook (he is usually chief farmer) excelled in
putting them together in soups and stews. Julia and I helped, Bill Evans
pinch-hit (he is cook in town now, but interrupted his retreat to help
out), and somehow all went smoothly and happily. The days were hot;
there was but one brief shower. One day the wind blew and one night it
was cold. The farm was silent except for the barking of McTavish every
time the bell rang for meals or conferences, and the shuttling of
freight trains from the valley below.

We were on a high hill, overlooking a flowing river; but down below we
could see the smoke and grime of Easton and Phillipsburg. It is a
constant reminder to us of our fellow workers--a reminder that God will
say to us when we approach Him: "Where are the others?"

And so retreats are never retreats in the modern sense of the word, but
a time to gird up the loins and strengthen oneself for the strong
combat.

To be specific, this retreat was a course of instruction in basic
principles and tactics which we have accepted and by which we shall live
and work, shunning the natural motive, working for the love of God. God
bless Father LaCouture and his fellow priests who have made such
retreats possible.

Broadcasting
===

And then it is a hard thing, getting out into the world and speaking
from the standpoint of the supernatural, as I had to do at the
Williamstown Institution of Human Relations. You are at such times, a
fool for Christ, as St. Paul so aptly puts it. People look upon you
indulgently, "a necessary contribution to the forum," "we must be
mindful of these things," but after all, "Miss Day is speaking of Heaven
and not of things of this earth."

This failure is one's own, of course, not to be able to do a good job of
correlating the material and the spiritual.

However, the real work of speaking at such a time, is the praying put
into it before and after, and the more ineffectual we feel ourselves to
be, the more praying we are going to do.

Galilee
===

The other day we drove Fr. Catich's little car down to the Fulton market
for a hundred pounds of fish and were delighted to find a **Galilee**
fish company there. One of our neighbors, Jimmy Dee works with the
company next door and he helps us get left over fish for our bread line.
It is good to come upon these constant reminders of Jesus Christ. There
are the men working there, fishermen and those marketing fish, all of
the men like Peter and James and John, all of them men to whom Christ is
speaking today as he spoke yesterday--the same men to whom he will speak
tomorrow. It is because of Him that they are our brothers and it is to
Him that Jimmie Dee gives the fish, one hundred pounds for a dollar.
