% Go To The Poor
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1942, 4.

*Summary: Inspired by the beauty and inner-city location of Los Angeles'
St. Bibiana Cathedral, this editorial focuses on the poor--" The closer
we are to the poor, the closer to Christ's love." Because May, 1942
marked *The Catholic Worker*'s tenth year, reminds readers that we are
called to love all men, friend and foe alike, because all are
brothers--"love is shown by works of mercy, not by war." (DDLW \#383).*

GO TO THE POOR
===

This is an editorial for "little ones," for the poor, the meek, the
suffering. I am writing it as I sit in St. Bibiana's Cathedral in Los
Angeles, a place of joy and beauty, set in the slums of a great city.

How wonderful that it should be here, surrounded by the poor--yes not
only by the poor, but the degraded and the lost ones of this world.
Christ chose a stable as a place to be born in. So how He must love to
be here.

Outside, on Second and Main streets in Los Angeles, there are pawnshops,
saloons, burlesque shows, flophouses. It is the "Skid road" of the city,
like our Bowery in New York. Inside, there is beauty and quiet and many
bowed in prayer at early Mass.

Pope Leo XIII said the workers were lost to the Church.

Pope Pius XI said to his priests: "Go to the poor."

Our Lord walked the highways and byways, dusty and tired, to teach His
brothers whom "God so loved." The closer we are to the poor, the closer
to Christ's love.

GO TO MARY
===

Mary was poor. St. Bonaventure, in his life of Christ, said St. Joseph
was so poor that he could not earn enough even for the simple wants of
the Holy Family, so the Blessed Mother took in sewing. Oh Mother of
beautiful love, of fear, of knowledge and of holy hope, teach us to be
poor, ever to have less so that others may have more, always to be the
little, the fools of this earth. Our Lord God, Creator of the world, was
born in a stable. Lend us your heart, and come to the stable of our
bodies, bearing our Lord to us, loving Him, praising Him, adoring Him
for us.

A NEW YEAR
===

This editorial, marking the beginning of the tenth year of The Catholic
Worker, is for all I met this month, all those families on the march,
those soldiers going to and from leave, those prisoners I met at the
reformatory at El Keno, for all our readers everywhere, the little and
the poor.

It is to all of us that the Church comes, "calling attention to our high
vocation as Christians, and to the great tasks, the conflicts and
sufferings which confront us in the Kingdom of God" (Short Breviary,
page 5, footnote).

We are the sons of God, believing in His Name, and we bring messages of
prayer and penance (Father Hugo), and messages of peace (Father
Orchard), messages to a world at war, a world to which penance is
foolishness, and peace, treason.

We enter a new year with this month of May, and we enter with a joyful
spirit, mindful of the love of God for us, and the love we should bear
for all, friend and foe, English, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, and
Germans. They are our brothers, and love for them is "the fulfilling of
the law." Love is "the measure by which we shall be judged," and that
love is to be shown by works of mercy, not by war.

ST. PAUL'S MESSAGE
===

"Put ye on therefore, brethren , the bowels of mercy, benignity,
humility, modesty, patience: bearing with one another and forgiving one
another, if any have a complaint against another: even as the Lord hath
forgiven you, so do you also. But above all these things, have charity,
which is the bond of perfection: and let the peace of Christ rejoice in
your hearts, wherein also you are called in one body (Col. III: 12-15).
