% Communism and the Intellectual
% Dorothy Day

*America*, 48 (January 28, 1933):401-402.

*Summary: Summarizes the pro-Communist and anti-Capitalist speeches by a
group of intellectuals at a symposium whose subject was "Why we vote
Communist." (DDLW \#42).*

Reprinted from *America,* January 28, 1933, with permission of America
Press, Inc., Â© 1933. For subscription information, call 1-800-627-9533
or visit [*www.americapress.org*](www.americapress.org).

Some months ago, "A symposium by and for intellectual workers held under
the auspices of the League of Professional Groups for Foster and Ford "
was held at Cooper Union. The hall was so packed with young people who
wished to hear those whom Earl Browder, an official of the Communist
party, termed the cream of the American intellectuals," that almost a
thousand were turned away at the door. " Why we vote Communist " was the
subject of the speeches. It will be illuminating to recall them.

Malcolm Cowley, a young poet and critic and one of the editors of the
*New Republic,* said briefly that capitalism does not preserve culture
and would eventually destroy all culture, so as a critic and poet he
would vote Communist because Communism upheld the tradition of culture
so dear to his Harvard and *New Republic* heart.

James Rorty, a poet, said he was voting Communist because he didn't want
to be a hesitant, doubtful poet like Archibald MacLeish, who wore a top
hat, by the way, and because he, James, was having such a lively time,
such valuable experiences, and because he didn't even have to stop
writing poetry while he soap-boxed for the Communist party. He added
that the "stench of physical misery and spiritual degradation of the
masses drives poets to Communism."

Donald Henderson, who with his wife has been in the public eye for
Communist activities lately, spoke for the universities. He said that
the narrowing of the economic base of the system of education, the
curtailed salaries, doubling up of classes, reduction of free
privileges, increasing of fees, tended so to keep the children of
working parents from enjoying educational advantages that it proved to
him the failure of the capitalist system and the necessity for its
overthrow. From the tremendous applause which greeted Henderson, one
would judge that a great part of the audience was made up of college
students and instructors.

Harry Jackson, a marine worker, was next on the program and what
distinguished his talk was his undisguised satisfaction in the confessed
plight of the intellectual. Capitalism, he said in forceful Communist
language, was a gigantic dung heap, and usually the intellectual played
the part of going around perfuming it. But now the intellectual wasn't
getting the pay he was accustomed to. Now he realized that he, too, was
liable to die of starvation. He added, strangely enough, for he is a
member of the Communist party:

We've looked for remedies, for patent medicines. Now we are getting
right down to the bottom. Give us a hand to find out a formula, you
chemists and architects, you professional workers. Tell us what we must
do and how, what path we must walk on, how to build a new system of
society.

M. J. Olgin, editor of the *Freiheit,* speaking for the foreign-born
intellectual, made a general confession of his past life.

I came to America in 1914 because the United States was the only country
not interested in the War. I was a Socialist but I was soon
disillusioned with both the Socialists of America and the United States.
I learned what the words *starvation*and*thug* meant. At Columbia
University, which I attended, pictures of Marx and Lassalle hung on the
walls of the economics seminar, but it was explained to me that Marx and
Lassalle had nothing to do with American life. I finished my courses and
I was entitled to teach economics, but my soul recoiled with horror at
the idea of teaching the sons of shopkeepers and perhaps of bankers.

Intellectuals " allured " him. They admired a book of his which he
didn't think so much of himself, and they took him up. He wrote for the
*New Republic,* the *Nation,*  the *Century,*  but he could not speak the
language of the people connected with these journals. He could not
assume with them that the foundations of American life were right and
that all that was needed were a few little improvements. He was a
general favorite in Boston, spoke before the Committee of One Hundred
and before women's clubs. He wore evening clothes and went out to dinner
and answered childish questions. One lady told him that she could see no
difference between him and gentlemen of her acquaintance.

Up to this time he had not understood the Russian revolution. He went
back to Russia, and in studying the effects of the revolution he came to
despise the part Socialists and intellectuals had played. It was only in
the Communist party that he found freedom, agreement with himself, the
agreement of work, and ideology. He had only begun to live since joining
the Communist party.

Eugene Gordon, journalist, speaking for the Negro intellectual, pointed
out how other leaders had failed in their attempts to emancipate their
race:

Communism is the only way out for the most pitiable victims of the
capitalist system. Their slavery has been perpetuated by wage slavery.
They have been kept by the capitalists, ignorant, illiterate,
superstitious, loyal, patriotic, and happy.

I am opposed to the mysticism of my race. Religion has been the best
weapon in the hands of capitalists against the Negro worker. Because
Communist doctrine destroys religion by exposing it to the
disintegrating light of reason, I am going to vote Communist.

John Hermann, who some months ago won the *Scribner* prize, and has
published several novels, gave a talk which could only be interpreted
as a burlesque on the talks which had gone before. He finished on a
flourish:

"See architects and engineers mowing lawns for their bread! See these
and other horrors of the capitalist system! Vote Communist!" Since
Hermann is an enthusiastic endorser of the Communist regime in Russia
and has traveled over the United States studying the conditions of
workers, and has spoken for the party at working-class meetings, one
could only think that he was poking fun at the intellectuals who were
gathered then together.

Earl Browder, speaking for the Communist party, was the one who referred
to the new organization of intellectual workers as the "cream of the
intellectual workers in America." He spoke of the meeting as
significant, a "distinct step towards the establishment of a Soviet
America," and added that the sort of intellectuals who were supporting
his party came from the very top or the very bottom. Either they were
economically independent so that they could choose their course without
fear of losing jobs and wages, or else they were newly graduated
intellectuals who had neither job nor salary to lose, and had just found
out that there was an overproduction of intellectuals as well as of
wheat. Socialism, since it was offered to the American people as a
substitute for Communism, was the greatest danger in America today.

Waldo Frank, novelist, spent most of his time apologizing for the fact
that he was not a working man but a bourgeois, and that the reason why
most intellectuals were bourgeois was because there was no opportunity
for the worker in America to raise himself to the level of the
"intellectual." Just because he was a bourgeois, he wasn't going to stop
working for the Communist party.

"The League of Professional Groups for Foster and Ford," the program
adds, "is composed of writers, artists, teachers, engineers, physicians,
architects, social workers, lawyers, scientists, journalists, and other
professional workers who are supporting the Communist ticket this year.
With rare exceptions, they are not members of the Communist party."
