% Untitled Review of 
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1947, 1, 2.

*Summary: Heartily recommends reading *Theology and Sanity* by Frank
Sheed--to study about God, "this is happiness and joy." Notes that it is
theology written by a layman, and the importance of their retreat work
in learning to know and love and serve God. (DDLW \#430).*

(Published by Sheed and Ward, 63 5th Ave.)

You can read ten pages of it on the Eighth Avenue subway from Canal
Street to 207^th^ Street. You can read three more pages of it while you
stand on a street corner waiting for a Spuyten-Duyvil bus. You can read
five more pages of it in the bus on your way to visit your family.
That's how I was engrossed by Mr. Frank Sheed's **Theology and Sanity**,
one of my Christmas presents.

At first I thought, this is a book you cannot mark up because if you
started underlining it, you'd be at it all the time. And then I had to
start underlining it because there were so many definitions I wanted to
remember.

To think about God, and to study about God, whom "heaven and the heaven
of heavens cannot contain" whose power is upon all things, "Do I not
fill heaven and earth?" "the Father of lights with whom there is no
change or shadow of alteration" "in whom we live and move and have our
being,"–this is happiness and joy.

When I started out this morning from St. Joseph's house at Mott Street,
thinking that "God must contain in Himself all the perfections we find
in things," and when I surveyed the dirt and filth of the slum streets,
the dull grey city skies in winter, the hideousness of the drug addict
whom we had prevented from beating his pregnant wife the night before, I
thought sadly to myself that the senses did not convey much of God to us
at that moment. We are assured by St. Paul that "from the foundation of
the world, men have caught sight of His invisible nature, His eternal
power and His divineness, as they are known through His creatures." So I
remembered and comforted myself with the memories of porpoises and
babies, of symphonies and storms, oceans and fragrant hot fields.

We always want to find God in beauty and talent and strength of mind and
body and spirit, in glory and honor. We are like the Jews looking for a
king. We do not expect to find Him in a stable, between the ox and the
ass or as a vagrant or a criminal on a cross. That is one of the dangers
in trusting to our senses, our imagination.

"To many the idea of bringing the intellect fully into action in
religion seems almost repellant," Mr. Sheed writes.

"The intellect seems so cold and measured and measuring, and the will so
warm and glowing. Indeed the joy of the will is always figured in terms
of warmth, such words as ardor, fervor and the like come from Latin
words for a fire burning; there is a fear that intellect can only damp
down the fire. Many again who do not find the use of the intellect in
religion actually repellent, regard it as at least unnecessary--at any
rate for the layman--and possibly dangerous. One can, they say, love God
without any very great study of doctrine. Indeed, they say, warming to
their theme, some of the holiest people they know are quite ignorant . .
. It is a strange God who could be loved better by being known less . .
. Love of God is immeasurably more important than knowledge of God, but
if a man loves God knowing a little about Him, he should love God more
from knowing more about Him, for every new thing known about God is a
new reason for loving Him . . . Light is the joy of the mind as warmth
is the joy of the will. But warmth and light are both the effects of
fire . . . In the appallingly difficult struggle to be good, the will is
helped immeasurably by the intellect's clear vision of the real
universe."

Which is the reason we are so intent on running retreat houses, for the
benefit of our readers and those who come to us for help. Retreat houses
are not houses of penance, as some of the objectors in our midst seem to
think. They are part and parcel of the agronomic university which Peter
Maurin envisioned. They are the basis and the beginning for all our
work. If we are not learning to know and to love and serve God, we are
not even making a beginning toward that "new heaven and new earth
wherein justice dwelleth."

Another reason why we want to recommend this most important book by
Mr. Sheed is that it is theology simply written by a layman. We are lay
people. *The Catholic Worker* is a lay paper, and we are engaged in the
work of the lay apostolate, answering the call of the Holy Father who
has urged all, without exception, to work for the salvation of souls. It
is good to think of Mr. Sheed as a father of a family, a busy man who
has a publishing house and has to be concerned with earning a living and
the price of paper and food. He knows the man in the street because of
his years of work in the Catholic Evidence Guild, and for all the hours
on the platform, there has been the rule that there must be double that
time spent in prayer. If you read this book, I am sure you will love God
more and you will pray and praise Him more.
