% House of Hospitality 
% Dorothy Day

Chapter Three
---

*Summary: Tales of hospitality, distributing the paper, and propaganda
meetings. Affirms the primacy of performing the works of mercy over
"talking and writing about the work." Quotes from Frederick Ozanam on
putting faith into action. Describes homey scenes at the beach house
with Theresa and their beachcomber friend Smiddy. Tells of their poverty
and their joy amid their city neighbors, a busy parish Church nearby,
and Peter's efforts in Harlem. (DDLW \#438).*

ALTHOUGH the Communists and Socialists had their hundreds of thousands
out in the streets yesterday, we feel that *The Catholic Worker* made its
presence felt, too. Fifteen or more high school and college students,
from Manhattan, Fordham, St. John's College, Cathedral College and from
City College distributed papers and leaflets in Union Square all
afternoon and in the evening up around Columbus Circle and Madison
Square Garden.

The man who was selling the I.W.W. paper in Madison Square came up to
get a copy from me, and said, "I was a Catholic myself once--I'd like to
see your paper." And people of all nationalities were anxious to get it.

One young woman came in this morning who said she had seen a copy in the
Square and wanted to find out about the House of Hospitality. She had
been living down on Rivington Street and now her money was all gone and
she had no place to go. She was telling me about her friend, who was
also down and out, who went to take a room, or a bed up in Harlem, was
seduced by a young Spanish American and threw herself under a subway
train a week later.

Her lips were trembling as she talked (it was only eight-thirty in the
morning), so I invited her out to have a cup of coffee.

Last week a colored woman who has been staying up at the Municipal
Lodging House came in for a bite to eat. She looked in need of a shelter
where she could stay in bed and rest for a few days instead of having to
walk the streets from morning to night as the guests of the lodging
house have to do.

So that evening I went to talk to the girls to see if it would be all
right with them to invite Mary to stay up there. After all, I did not
want to run the risk of submitting her to insult on account of her
color--nor did I expect too much of the girls in the way of freedom from
race prejudice, since I know very well that Catholics of means and
better education are not free themselves from it.

I talked to the girls, reminding them how our Lord washed the feet of
His disciples the night before He suffered and died for us, and told
them how we all should serve each other, whether we are white, black or
yellow. The girls were perfectly happy to welcome the new guest, and it
was like a special birthday present for the paper to find this
continuing of the cooperative spirit among them.

Mary took the paper up to Harlem to distribute for us yesterday, and all
the other girls up at the house went to Mass or Communion to offer it up
for our special May Day work. Margaret, our cook, despite her condition,
for she is expecting her baby in six weeks, went on the subway
yesterday, passing out papers from Times Square to Astoria and from
Manhattan to Brooklyn. I was much touched and grateful for the help they
all gave us.

An old Irishman of 73 came in this morning for his copies of the paper.
He lives down in the Bowery and has a thirty-dollar-a-month pension,
from which he insists on giving us a dollar. He comes in regularly every
month.

2
-

It was good to sit out in the back yard this afternoon and have tea and
I was glad to see Helen Crowe here when I got back. She had been
attending a meeting around the corner and she had some work to do, and
so came in to use our typewriter. Peter read and argued with her from
*The Militant* which calls for a Fourth International, and he, Peter, was
arguing for a fifth. I had to keep shushing him so that Helen could get
her work done and come out and have tea. We had moved a couch out into
the back yard and brought out the rose bush, the hyacinth and the
daffodil plants, and the sun was hot and it was delicious.

Peter should be happy now that he has a companion with****whom to carry
on dialogues. Haig, as he is called, has been staying up at the
Municipal Lodging House for some time and Peter wanted to take him in at
the office in order to have him to argue with for the school. So now
Peter sleeps on a mattress on the floor, and Mr. Haig on Peter's bed.
Haig is not a Catholic, but a German Evangelical, or something like
that, but he has not practiced any religion since childhood. Peter
introduced him to me as an anarchist, but for the purposes of argument,
he is a Communist orthodox one night, Left Wing Opposition another
night, Socialist another, Fascist, etc.

He is undergoing a course of reading under the supervision of Peter,
starting with Christopher Dawson's *The Modern Dilemma,* and he is
writing an article for the paper on the Municipal Lodging House. Tonight
he is making himself useful by going up to Father Scully's parish to a
Holy Name meeting to argue with Peter. It is to be a regular Platonic
Dialogue and Peter is reveling in the thought that he has been given
the floor for the evening. I am afraid they will be regarded as
entertaining rather than instructive. Father Scully's parish, being one
of the richest in the city, is not fertile ground to work in as far as I
can see. The Psalmist says: "Those who are in honor are without
understanding."

Afterwards they are going up to Harlem to argue from eleven to one,
taking the tail-end of what street meetings are going on. Later they
hope to get permission from the Police Department to do some speaking.

The best meeting of this week was that at which we had Father Donnelly
who is a marvel at explaining dogma. He pays his audience the
compliment, or rather does them the honor, of explaining the most
difficult doctrines completely. He gives them the very best that he has,
and when he wondered, a little discouraged at some of the questions
which came out of the meeting, whether anyone had gotten anything out of
his talk, I told him that my feeling was that it was too much expected
today that people should be articulate. That is, if they are not able to
repeat back like parrots what they have been told, it is taken for
granted that they have not grasped the subject matter. There are so many
dogmas which one can feel and yet not express.

The meeting was crowded to the doors. Late in the evening a drunken
Irishman came in and listened for a while open-mouthed, and then got up,
waving his hand in farewell.

"I have listened and I've listened," he said, "but, never once have I
heard the name of the Mother of God mentioned." And he went
disconsolately out of the door.

If Harry Crimmins had been here, his great devotion to the Blessed
Mother would have impelled him to rush out after the poor creature and
walk the streets with him all night talking of the Blessed Virgin. But
as it was the old man got away before anyone could say a word to him.

Another man came up after the meeting and said, "This is one of the
worst evenings I have ever spent, how in the world do you stand it."

But the others stood it so well that they stayed and stayed until
eleven, instead of going at ten as we try to persuade them to do. There
were men from Columbus Circle there, a number of union men from the
neighborhood, and all in all, the majority of them people the meetings
are intended for.

After the meeting, Father Donnelly, Frank, Tom, Joe, Dorothy and I went
across the street to our German cafe where we had limburger sandwiches
and bock beer, which were very good. Father Donnelly had to finish part
of his Office to the strains of most atrocious jazz coming over the
radio.

A Mexican came in the other day with an introduction from a Mexican
Jesuit who had been staying in a parish down on Second Avenue and is
going back Mexico this June. Mr. Frisbie is a very zealous and inspiring
man, all afire with zeal for souls. But he is also very funny.

He and his wife are staying in New York so that she can be examined by
doctors to find out whether her heart will permit her to live in Mexico
City which is too high for most heart cases. But if they cannot stay
there, then he is going down to the State of Tabasco where there is only
one priest and he in hiding, disguised as a porter. Mr. Frisbie wants to
assist him with catechetical work. How his wife's heart will stand that,
I do not know.

He very generously offered to go up to speak to the Spanish American
group of boys at 112th Street, who have no conception of Catholicism.

I hope he has some effect on them.

3
-

A few days ago we had quite a time at the House of Hospitality. An old
lady who has been staying there, was run down by a truck some time ago
and her face badly bruised. The owner of the truck came around and
settled with her so that she would not sue, and with the money in her
hand she proceeded to get drunk. It took a priest, seven policemen and a
steamfitter, and the circulation manager and editor of a paper to get
her out of the house and then she won out, and was really victorious.

One old woman who had come in drunk a few months ago was told to go, and
why we should waste any more time on Nellie I didn't see. However, I
went to St. Zita's and they said they would care for her there. That
evening, after having tried in vain twice that day to get her to St.
Zita's, and she having consumed four pints, Father Seccor and Harry and
I went up. Nothing could be done with her, so Father went out to call a
policeman hoping that his uniform would impress her to the extent of
accompanying him in a cab to the Home. But one policeman always brings
others in his train, and before we knew it, two radio cars had driven
up, two policemen from their beats had appeared, and it was indeed an
impressive sight to hear the sirens and see the police rushing to
protect the House of Hospitality from poor little Nellie.

She finally agreed to get into the cab with one policeman and Father
Seccor and Harry, after she had been given the choice of the station
house, Bellevue or the Home, but once in the cab she insisted on going
to a rooming house where she was known. It was too late by this time to
get her in St. Zita's, so they went to the rooming house, going in with
her, to impress upon the landlady, who might have been dishonest, that
Nellie was not to be tampered with. There she will drink herself out, or
go to Chicago, as she said she was going to do with the money.

Yes, there had been a good deal of trouble lately, John with his heart
attack, Dorothy sick again and then Nellie on her drunk. It would seem
that we lead a disturbed and harassed life, and yet on the whole we are
very peaceful. Everything runs really harmoniously and smoothly and our
headquarters is a pleasant place of an evening with everyone at his
activities. Last night there was no meeting and Mr. Minas sat and wrote
poetry in lovely fine Armenian script, smoking his strange-smelling
cigarettes; Haig, the German, pondered over Christopher Dawson's latest
book; Peter, the Frenchman, plotted his propaganda; Jimmie Raksi, our
little Hungarian boy from the reformatory, played with the kitten,
having just virtuously attended his Catechism class; Margaret, our
Lithuanian, curled her hair in preparation for Sunday, and the rest of
us, English, Irish and American, listened to a symphony orchestra play
Beethoven.

4
-

I have been reading a lot of Ozanam lately. He started his religious
Conferences of St. Vincent de Paul after the "history conferences" had
been carried on for about a year. One of his companions confessed
himself to be tired of the "eternal controversies".

The difficulty with Ozanam's group was evidently just the opposite of
our main difficulty. Dorothy has been married for the past six months
and she and Tom are only in the office a few hours a day. They are both
mainly interested in propaganda, the getting out of a paper and
pamphlets, and are not much interested in the works of mercy or houses
of hospitality except as propaganda centers, with a careful weeding out
going on all the time so that only those who agree with us and
work****with us are kept.

Ozanam's group discarded the propaganda and kept only to the charitable
work so that indoctrination did not *go* hand in hand with charity. We
feel that the two must go together since we are trying to change the
social order. We have to change the social order so that men will have a
chance to become men.

Following Peter's ideas, we are trying to make the workers into scholars
and the scholars workers. So we take whoever comes to us as sent by God
and do not believe in picking and choosing. If we start eliminating then
there is no end to it. Everyone wishes to eliminate someone else. In a
group of people living together more or less in community, grievances
always pile up which change from day to day and from month to month.
Even if we had only picked "intellectuals", young students and
propagandists, there would be dissensions and grave differences of
opinion. Tom and Dorothy are more at home with the scholars and wish to
concentrate more on propaganda. As it is, most of the money is spent on
food and shelter and not much is left for the paper and for pamphlets.

But Peter and I feel that the work is more important than the talking
and writing about the work. It has always been through the performance
of the works of mercy that love is expressed, that people are converted,
that the masses are reached.

"Charity should never look behind but always ahead, because the number
of her past good deeds is always small, whereas the present and future
miseries which she must solace are infinite," Ozanam wrote.

"The faith, the charity of the first ages, they are not too much for our
age. Evils equally great must have an equal remedy. The earth has gone
cold, and it is for us Catholics to reanimate the vital heat which is
being extinguished, to recommence the era of the martyrs. For to be a
martyr is a thing within the reach of all Christians. It is to give our
lives for God and for our brothers....

"The race of man in our days seems to me like the reveller of whom the
Gospel speaks. It, too, has fallen among thieves who stole away its
treasure of faith and love. The priests and the Levites have passed and
this time, as they were true priests and Levites, they approached and
longed to heal the sufferer. But in its delirium it knew them not and
repulsed them. In our turn, feeble Samaritans, profane and of little
faith though we be, we dare, nevertheless, to accost this great invalid.
Perhaps it will not be affrighted at us, so let us try to probe its
wounds and to pour oil into them, to whisper in its ears words of
consolation and peace, and then, when its eyes re-open, we will put it
back into the hands of those whom God has constituted the guardians and
physicians of souls.

"When we Catholics reminded these straying brethren of the marvels of
Christianity, they used one and all to retort: 'You are right if you
speak of the past; Christianity in other times did wonders, but today it
is dead. And indeed, you who boast of your Catholicism, what do you do?
Where are the works which prove your faith and would make us respect and
admit it?' They were justified; this reproach was only too well
deserved. Well, then, to work! Let our acts square with our faith. And
what were we to do in order to be genuine Catholics if not that which is
most pleasing to the eyes of God? Let us then help our neighbor as Jesus
Christ did, and put our faith under the protection of charity. . . ."

In season and out of season, he pleaded for "the annihilation of the
political spirit in the interests of the social spirit."

5
-

June 1934

"I said 'Hail Marys' all the while I was picking flowers," Teresa told
me this morning when she came in with a bouquet of purple clover,
daisies and buttercups to put in front of her much-loved statue of the
Child King.

We are in our little house on the beach where I am taking an enforced,
and oh, how welcome, vacation because of Teresa's illness. She is all
better now, but after three weeks in the hospital and four weeks in what
she calls a "conbalescent home" I did not dare bring her back to the
city. So here we are, all happy and solitary.

We dine on clams and eels and baked sand shark, and on dock weed of
which there are still some tender leaves remaining, and we till the soil
to plant flowers, and gather shells, mount seaweed, wade and row and
endure sunburn and offer up constant thanksgiving for the beauties all
around us.

Today the bay is rough with a constant sound of water, and since the bay
is enclosed it is the sound of waterfalls rather than the sound of the
surf.

We cannot go to Mass in the morning because the nearest church is five
miles away and the chapel up in the village is only open on Saturday
nights and Sundays We strove to get permission to go to a near-by chapel
where there is daily Mass for a community of Sisters but the permission
was not given, so we content our selves with morning prayers, led by
Teresa who learned lots of new ones up at her convalescent home in
Palenville which is run by the Franciscan Missionaries of Mary.

"The way you learn new prayers," Teresa told me, "is just****to say them
over night and morning every day for a while. I like learning new ones
so you must teach me some.

Her favorite just now is an ejaculatory prayer, which she says comes to
her mind often during the day. "By thy holy pitrinity and by thy
Immaculate Conception, purify my body and sanctify my soul."

I gather that the peculiar word in the first paragraph means 'maternity"
and I try to change the prayer for her but she is fond of it the way it
is. She is only eight, but quite set in her ways, and if a Sister says a
thing, it is so, regardless of what my opinion may be.

The "new" prayer we are learning now is the Song of the Three Children,
very fitting to say down here on the beach where there is not only sand
and sea, but field and woodland; where there is not only the odor of
sweet ass and clover, but the salt smell of seaweed and the pleasant
odor of decaying sea life.

There is much to do every day. We have to watch the tide, for when it
is out, Smiddy will be going down to dig bait and clams and we must
accompany him.

Smiddy lives on the beach in a little old shanty eight feet square, just
big enough for a narrow cot and an oil stove. It is a place built by one
of the neighbors to put fishing tackle and lobster traps in, but no
sooner was it built than Smiddy's tent, in which he had lived for some
years, was washed away by an unusually high tide and he moved into the
shack to take possession from that day to this. Seven years have passed
and now it is Smiddy's shack, and he repays the neighbors for allowing
him to squat by gifts of clams and fish.

When he needs a haircut, he goes up to the barber with clams. When he
wants groceries, he exchanges fish for them. Long years ago he captained
a barge, but his young wife died and since then he has been a
beachcomber and he has never worked as the neighbors mean the word. Nor
had he ever wanted to work except at his clamming and fishing until the
WPA came to the island. Then he tried to get a job, and has been
indinant ever since at his failure.

Smiddy has known Teresa ever since she was six weeks old and he it was
who contributed the lobsters--two dozens of them, trapped by
himself--for her baptismal feast. He has always let her help him skin
eels, clean fish and dig bait, though she was more of an obstruction
than a help when she was one and two years old. He is quite at home with
her now as she picks up the footlong sand worms and black fat clams "to
save his back', he says gratefully.

Did I say we were solitary? There is always Smiddy and there are also
two Communist children who live up the road and who come down to swim.
Teresa has known little Mike since she was two and he three. Even then
he was an adventurous youth and, pretending he was a doctor, syringed
out her ear by pouring sand in it through a funnel. The little girl,
Bunty, is five and she and Teresa have fun playing house and Michael
feels out of it, and tries to lord it over them.

They stayed to supper one night last week when they were down on the
beach and Michael carried on a long aggrieved monologue:

"I'm going to take a boat and go rowing pretty soon.

Wish there was a Russian boat out there--I'd row right out and get on
it. If it caught on fire, I'd row right out there and put that fire out,
I would. If you want to be a sailor, the Russian boats are the only ones
to sail on. The American sailors never get anything to eat and when they
go to sleep they just have bunks so small that they have to hang their
feet out the port holes. But the Russian sailors eat right with the
captain, and they have parlors to sleep in and to read in. I'm going to
be a sailor when I grow up and sail right off to Russia and work there.
And you can't come."

Michael puts over his propaganda, and in little ways Teresa puts over
hers. She tells Bunty not to take the Lord's name in vain, but Bunty
doesn't know what she is talking about. She tries to tell her the story
of the Nativity, bringing out her Christmas creche, but to Bunty it is a
Christmas story, no more.

And I am saddened as I hear the little conversations, to think of the
generation of children growing up to whom religion means nothing, to
whom the name of God is but an expletive, and to whom in the case of
many workers' children, the social ideals of the Communists mean
something definite, something to be worked for, striven for and
sacrificed for, with all the budding idealism of their natures.

Teresa will stay down here on the beach for the rest of the summer with
some friends who have rented the bungalow and have children of their
own. They not only take care of her, but also pay rent for the place,
and the money comes in very handy. I would sell the little place if I
could--we need the money so badly, but it is impossible to sell property
nowadays. I had paid \$2,250 for the house and lot which is twenty by
seventy feet, ten years ago, but it will be impossible ever to get
anything like that for it. However, renting it in the summer brings us
money which we sorely need. Last summer we rented it for ten dollars a
week. That and the twenty-five dollars a week I earned at a few odd jobs
tided us over those first months when the work was being launched. I do
feel strongly that we must put everything we have into the work in
embracing voluntary poverty for ourselves. It is only when we do this
that we can expect God to provide for us. If we do everything we can
ourselves, He will supplement our efforts. This is one of the
fundamental points of our work in stressing personal responsibility
before state responsibility. It is only when we have used all our
material resources that we feel it permissible to call upon the state
for aid, that in good conscience we can demand and expect help from the
state.

6
-

A few weeks ago, I went over to St. Zita's to see a Sister there and the
woman who answered the door took it for granted that I came to beg for
shelter. The same morning I dropped into the armory on Fourteenth
Street, where lunches are being served to unemployed women, and there
they again motioned for me to go into the waiting room, thinking that I
had come for food. These incidents are significant. After all, my heels
are not run down-my clothes are neat--I am sure I looked averagely
comfortable and well cared for-and yet it was taken for granted that
because I dropped into these places, I needed help. It just shows how
many girls and women, who to the average eye, look as though they came
from comfortable surroundings, are really homeless and destitute.

You see them in the waiting rooms of all the department stores. To all
appearances they are waiting to meet their friends, to go on a shopping
tour--to a matinee, or to a nicely served lunch in the store restaurant.
But in reality they are looking for work (you can see the worn
newspapers they leave behind with the help wanted page well-thumbed),
and they have nowhere to go, nowhere to rest but in these public
places--and no good hot lunch to look forward to. The stores are
thronged with women buying dainty underwear which they could easily do
without--compacts for one dollar, when the cosmetics in Woolworth's are
just as good--and mingling with these protected women, and often
indistinguishable from them, are these sad ones, these desolate ones,
with no homes, no jobs, and never enough food in their stomachs.

7
-

The printer called up this morning wanting to know affably when we were
going to finish paying our bill (one hundred thirty dollars still to
go). We told him he had better get busy and pray for it right hard.

A huckster goes by selling potatoes twenty pounds for a quarter. We stop
to buy them for lunch. Margaret, whose baby is due any minute now, sits
in a rocking chair in the back yard and meditates on the petunias
blooming there, so the editors are cooks and the circulation manager is
dishwasher.

We have often thought of the joys connected with poverty that the
respectably comfortable people do not have. Living and working as we do
in this store, which opens on the street in front and a back yard in the
rear, we are much more in the open air than we would be if we had swanky
offices somewhere. (Somebody who belonged to an anti-Jew organization
came in once last year and offered us swell offices and we all but threw
him out of the window). In the morning and evening we can have meals in
the yard, though of course we are in danger of having people shake their
rugs or mops over us. We try to train them not to, but it is hard. In
the evening after Benediction, the Italian, Polish, German and Irish
neighbors gather on their front steps and chat and drink beer, homemade
and not so strong as that you get in the beer gardens.

These hot nights all the fire hydrants are turned on like geysers and
the street is cooled off somewhat, and not far away there is a pier down
by the East River where you can sit and watch the moon come up.

Neighbors are neighborly and always ready to extend a helping hand. In
fact, most of the furniture and clothing which comes into the office to
be redistributed comes from the poor. They give what they can, they
offer themselves and their time.

And in all these people and the things they do for us and for each
other, we find the love of God working through the love of one's
neighbor. "I will arise, and will go about the city. In the streets
and the broad ways I will seek Him whom my soul loveth." And, indeed,
here is where you find Him, in the person of His poor.

Summer is a hard time for us, however. Priests and laymen who can afford
to, write and send us their contributions to keep us going, from all
over the country. But in the summer they are away on retreat, or giving

retreats, or on vacations, so we are never sure of the whereabouts of
our friends. We do not know whether the paper reaches them, with
appeals, or whether it sits idly in its envelope waiting for the
reader's return.

For the poor there are no vacations. There may be Sunday picnics, but
even those mean carfare and lunches for the whole family. Labor troubles
continue unabated. This afternoon in this neighborhood there is going to
be an anti-war baby parade, with all the mothers decking their carriages
in placards and marching down Second Avenue.

Women and children are used because it is believed that the police will
hesitate to attack them as they have been attacking the unemployed
demonstrators in other parts of the city. They are being used to further
another kind of war--class war--but they do not recognize that. They
feel they are doing right in taking, their babies and demonstrating
against war.

8
-

A heavy heat continues to hang over the city. When I hurry out at seven
o'clock there is a haze over the river a few blocks down, sparkling in
the sun, but no sign of the thundershowers that have been promised for
the last five days.

It is pleasant before Mass to sit and meditate early in the morning in
the little Italian Church down on Twelfth Street. On the left hand side
the open windows look out on fire escapes and roofs, green-edged with
plants. Close to the church window there is corn growing in a tub,
tomato plants, basil and other pots of herbs which are fragrant if you
crush them between your fingers. People are leaning out of their windows
already, trying to get a breath of air.

Inside the Church of Our Lady Help of Christians, the two Italian girls
sing the Mass with joyous natural voices, trilling through the Kyrie
Eleison. The priest, weighed down with his heavy robes, moves with
intent stillness through the sacrifice of the Mass.

I love this church of the Salesian Fathers. It is indeed what a church
should be, the center of the community. Every morning at the seven and
eight o'clock Masses, both of which are sung, there is a goodly
gathering of people, not just devout old ladies and old men, but many
young ones too.

Before and after Mass there is always a priest hearing confessions.

Every evening from five o'clock on to past nine, people dropping in,
before supper, on their way home from market, from work, from play on
the streets--everyone is living on the streets these hot days. There is
a crowd at the recitation of the rosary and Benediction. The whole
congregation sings the hymns and litanies. And even those priests who
are not on duty are there somewhere in evidence. The church is their
dearest home, and they evidently love to be contemplating the Humanity
of Christ, present there in the Tabernacle.

Every afternoon the pastor has arranged that a shower be rigged up to
the fire hydrant out in front of the church from three to six, so that
the children of the neighborhood can bathe these hot summer days. When I
dropped in to Benediction the other night the shower was still going,
and a little baby of two was wandering up and down the gutter which had
miraculously become a speeding brook, wetting her shoes and socks, and
occasionally all the rest of her as she sat down now and again.

In addition to a parish school, the church cooperates with the Keating
Day Nursery across the street, where the various associations have their
communion breakfasts and many meetings. There is a regular settlement
there and activities are always going on, winter and summer. There is
also a camp, where the children are sent for a few weeks in the summer.

9
-

Father LaFarge paid a call on Peter Maurin at our new branch
headquarters up in Harlem. There has been no money to turn on the
electricity, nor yet money for candles, so Peter receives callers who
come in the evening in the dark, or, rather, with just the light of the
street outside. Father LaFarge said that all he could see in the
encircling gloom was Peter's forefinger, motioning in the air as he was
making points.

The work in Harlem continues apace. There are street meetings three
times a week on different corners up and down Lenox Avenue, which go on
well into the night and small hours of the morning.

Mr. Hergenhen is the commissar, and he and Peter live on soup a good
deal of the time. They have to beg for their food, or for money to buy
it. I picked up Peter's prayer book the other day, a little red pamphlet
printed at the Monastery of the Precious Blood out in Brooklyn, and on
one of the fly leaves was listed some of his needs. "Food, stencils,
paper, pamphlets, etc." He didn't need to jot them down to remember
them. Maybe it was a little reminder for Our Lord.

Vegetable soup--that's Peter's old standby. So yesterday, Sunday, when
he came down to spend the day at the office on Fifteenth Street, we made
a huge kettle of soup the like of which he had never seen before. It was
a cold beet borscht (can it be that we are being influenced by Moscow,
or is it just the East Side?) made from a can of beets, a chopped-up
cucumber, green-topped onions, hard-boiled egg, potatoes and sour cream.
All mixed together, a little dill chopped up on top, and made good and
cold in the icebox (no cooking at all needed)--it was a delicious feed
for a hot day. We had enough to have it for breakfast, dinner and
supper.
