%  *House of Hospitality*
% Dorothy Day

Chapter, Eight
---

*Summary: After describing their search for a farm and the move to Mott
Street, most of the chapter is a clarification of why they support
organizing and striking workers. Contrasts their peaceful methods with
the communist calls for violence in a class war. Asserts a spiritual
foundation based on the dignity of man, a philosophy of labor, and the
unity of the Mystical Body of Christ. Wants workers to become owners and
lauds the cooperative and back-to-the-land movements. (DDLW \#443).*

1
-

IF IT were not for the generosity of a subscriber who loaned us the use
of his car for the search we might still be looking and our readers
might still be looking for news of the farming commune we have been
talking about starting all winter. The search was begun really a year
ago and continued sporadically through the year. By Christmas we began
to look more intensively.

Every time a group ventured out, the rain began to pour, turned to
sleet, caked the pavements and hindered our advance. The elements
themselves seemed to conspire against our hunt. Every time we went out
we skidded into snow banks, went off the road, narrowly escaped
collisions and barely saved the borrowed car from wreck.

But our farm was finally found on top of a mountain where level fields
stretched out for twenty-eight acres and overlooked a magnificent scene
on all sides. There are peach trees, some apple and cherry trees,
raspberry bushes, half an acre of asparagus. The house has three
bedrooms, each roomy enough for three beds and an attic big enough for
eight. There is a large dining-room and good sized kitchen. The
outbuildings are falling apart. The road to the place will always need
mending. There are eight acres of woodland. The price of the farm is
twelve hundred and fifty dollars, and we are able through the generosity
of a friend to pay a thousand in cash and we can make up the rest
immediately. In return for the use of this money, we are to build her a
house and give her an acre of land. We have a good builder and the debt
will be repaid or begin to be repaid at once.

We are beginning the farm as humbly as we began *The Catholic
Worker* which started with no staff, no headquarters, no mailing list and
no money. But this small beginning is part of our propaganda. St.
Francis says you cannot know what you have not practiced. From now on
when we write about the land movement as a cure for unemployment we will
be writing about a small group of people who are on the land and who,
without funds and by making real sacrifices, are trying to build another
way of life for themselves.

We have the land, the truck to do the moving and on April 15th a group
will go to take possession. This experiment, written about from month to
month, should be of interest to groups of families, to the unemployed,
to the college graduate who comes out of school and does not know which
way to turn.

2
-

When Communists and Socialists laughingly accuse us of wasting too much
energy on temporal matters and remind us "Seek ye first the Kingdom of
Heaven," I think the words of the Pater Noster: "Thy Kingdom come *on
earth* as it is in heaven." We must make it possible for people to
fulfill the new commandment Jesus gave--that we love all men. Communists
like to say that it is only charity (in its present ugly sense of a
dole) thats enjoined, and they make charity seem ugly, and try to
persuade men only to work for justice, when charity is highest of all
and includes all. We must never forget that works of mercy include
enlightening the ignorant and rebuking the sinner. St. Paul was
advocating a boycott when he said:

"And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and do
not keep company with him, that he may be ashamed. Yet do not esteem him
as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother." (II Thessalonians, 3)

Thomas a Kempis says when we are feeling dry as dust, sad and unhappy,
to employ ourselves in exterior works of mercy. I know by experience how
some good brisk house-cleaning can revive one's spirits. Manual labor,
bringing order out of chaos, also brings serenity to the soul and we
have been having a good deal of that lately, as we have moved from
Charles Street.

3
-

Little Felicia stood on the sidewalk as we moved into the Mott Street
house last week and surveyed us with a pleasant smile.

"Can we come into your office and to your meetings?" she wanted to know.
Some young high school students stood around and read copies of the
paper aloud and a group gathered and listened.

"Are the meetings free?" they asked.

Dominick who is eight and several of his black-eyed friends were the
active ones, insisting on helping us to move in, helping to store things
in the cellar down under the store where the office of the paper will be
from now on.

Charlie O'Rourke and Frank O'Donnell stood down below while we passed
them planks, small tables, sections of book cases and stored them away
in corners for future moving to the farm.

"There's a big rat like a kitten running around down here," called
Charlie O'Rourke calmly.

"We have lots of rats," said Felicia. "When they come out in the room we
jump up on the bed while my father chases them with the broom."

"It's funny when he catches them by the tail," said her friend Susie
gayly.

Our new home on Mott Street is a rear tenement of twenty rooms and an
apartment in the front building and store in front, the use of all of
which is given us by one of our readers. It is a good solid old house,
the banisters like iron, the walls of brick and built to stay. There are
plenty of windows and in the morning the sun comes in. We brought some
plants in from Staten Island and hope eventually to have a little grotto
out in the yard with St. Joseph in it, to oversee the house. The
day-lilies and daisy plants will last for awhile and then can be
replaced by other flowers from the farm.

We are overwhelmed with the space of our new home and so far as we
ourselves are concerned, the rats do not bother us at all.

The moving day, Saturday, April 18th, was a happy one. There must have
been twelve loads of furniture coming down from Charles Street on the
old truck we bought last month. Hard as the work was, it meant that
those able bodied ones who were working and who are king forward to
working on the farming commune, were that much nearer to the country.
One of the movers, with a gigantic icebox on his shoulders, grinned at
me as he passed.

"I'm a longshoreman and I'm used to heavy work," he said, stretching
himself as he set down his load. *"The Catholic Worker* has been a good
friend of ours and when I and my friends came in to get some of your
breakfast this morning and found you moving, we were glad we could help
you."

The work of painting and cleaning is still going on, but we are at home
in that we feel settled and happy in our new abode, at home in that we
are welcoming guests as usual, who we are sure will excuse the present
disorder. There is love and devotion going into the decorating of the
house. Our benefactor is donating linoleum for the kitchen and dining
room and curtains for the entire house and it will be a clean cheerful
place. We cannot promise always to be orderly when there are so many
guests that the walls bulge with them. But the disorder that will be
present will be a comfortable disorder.

The Lord sends us more rooms to accommodate guests and at once there are
more guests, fellow workers who have no other place to go. There is a
seamen's strike going on and many of the men have been sleeping on the
floor of the strike headquarters for weeks. Down in the country too, the
house is crammed, and with this large community numbering about fifty
who need to be fed three meals a day, we are faced with the fact that
there is \$6.80 on hand and a grocery bill of two hundred, and a
printing bill of four hundred. Rosemary, who leads the kitchen police,
now says she can feed an able-bodied man for two dollars a week, but
that is without meat.

4
-

It was after this early spring seamen's strike that I made the following
speech and rewrote it as an article afterwards, to try to clarify our
stand in regard to conflicts such as the present one we were engaged in:

"Let us be honest, let us say that fundamentally, the stand we are
taking is not on the ground of wages and hours and conditions of labor,
but on the fundamental truth that men should be treated not as chattels,
but as human beings, as 'temples of the Holy Ghost.' When Christ took on
our human nature, when He became Man, He dignified and ennobled human
nature. He said, 'The Kingdom of Heaven is within you.' When men are
striking, they are following an impulse, often blind, often uninformed,
but a good impulse--one could even say an inspiration of the Holy
Spirit. They are trying to uphold their rights to be treated not as
slaves, but as men. They are fighting for a share in the management, for
their right to be considered partners in the enterprise in which they
are engaged. They are fighting against the idea of their labor as a
commodity, to be bought and sold.

"Let us concede that the conditions at the Victor RCA plant down in
Camden, where a strike started last month, which is said to involve
13,000 men, are not bad conditions, and that wages and hours are not
bad. There probably is a company union which is supposed to take care of
such conditions and complaints, but it perpetuates the enslavement of
the worker.

"Let us concede that the conditions of the seamen are not so atrocious
as the Daily *Worker* contends. (It is no use talking about the steward's
department on passenger ships which has had, and in some cases still
has, unbearable hours and conditions of labor.) Let us get down to the
fundamental point that the seamen are striking for the right to be
considered partners, sharers in responsibility, the right to be treated
as men and not as chattels.

"Is it not a cause worth fighting for? Is it not a cause which demands
all the courage, and all the integrity, of the men involved? Let us be
frank and make this our issue.

"Let us be honest and confess that it is the social order which we wish
to change. The workers are never going to be satisfied, no matter how
much pay they get, no matter what their hours are.

"This, of course, is the contention of the ship owners, of employers and
industrialists the world over. They know that strikes are going to go
on, no matter what concessions are made along these lines. They too will
not face the fundamental issues involved.

"During the seamen's strike in the spring and the months after when the
men were staying at the Catholic Worker House on Mott Street--there were
about fifty who came and found jobs and went away to have their places
taken by others--we had an opportunity to talk to many of them. There
was many a round table discussion over the preparation of vegetables
and the washing of dishes and the mailing out of the paper (for the men
joined in our work while they were with us). They have written to us
since they left, and they return to see us when they come back into
port.

"One night we were talking with a Communist, a young fellow from Iowa,
born of a Catholic father and a Methodist mother. It was hard to talk to
him--we were both convinced we were right, we were both animated by the
truth--but he refused to concede the spiritual. Philosophically we
differed. But a great many truths came out in these arguments.

"He used to stand in the middle of the kitchen floor, a dish towel in
his hands, and suspend all operations while he talked. Tennessee, Yank,
Ryan and the others went on working, laughing at his earnestness and his
inability to co-ordinate work and discussion.

"He used to take refuge in anti-clericalism, in attacks on our refusal
to face facts, in what he liked to label our 'sentimentality.' Often he
would be driven to name-calling because he felt himself defeated in
argument and there was no other refuge for him.

"But there were many things we agreed on.

"He was telling us one night how he caused a disturbance on board ship
over the constant mess of stew they had been served. Overtime work,
crowded quarters, uncomfortable mattresses, the menu, all these were the
issues seized upon as a chance for a disturbance, a miniature strike. He
had been spending his days at sea figuring out ways to forward the
revolution, and on this occasion it was stew.

"We asked him whether he really thought that a cause worth fighting for
to the shedding of blood. We asked him whether the other seamen, who
were fundamentally sane, did not object to these obstructionist tactics
of the Communist. If they did not hinder their own cause by this tactic?

"He maintained that if they would not join in it was because they were
cowardly and selfish.

"We maintained that it was because they knew it was not the cause for
which they were fighting.

"We pointed out that there on Mott Street they were sleeping six in an
apartment, between blankets, no sheets, that the food was insufficient,
and the washing facilities most primitive. They had no showers, no hot
water to wash out their clothes. (And they were always washing out their
clothes. A cleaner lot of men would be hard to find.) They had to walk
ten blocks to get to a public bath.

"We pointed out that if the men were running the ship themselves, they
would put up with any sacrifice, go without food, submit to crowded
quarters, take a minimum of pay, if only they were recognized as masters
of their own destinies. 'And that is why we are working towards a
workers' republic,' he said triumphantly.

"We made him admit that some men were capable of leadership and others
weren't, that some men were trained to hold certain positions and had to
hold them. We brought out Tawney's ideas of functional classes as
opposed to acquisitive classes.

"But the worker had no chance to improve himself so he could become an
officer, he claimed. Or if he had, he was still in the position of being
a flunkey, or a hireling of the masters. There was always the profit
system, the idea of labor being sold as a commodity, whether it was the
labor of the captain or the crew.

"It was, we conceded, the whole social system that was out of joint. And
it was to reconstruct the social order, that we were throwing ourselves
in with the workers, whether in factories or shipyards or on the sea.

"The co-operative movement is a good one because it offers an
opportunity to rebuild within the shell of the old with a new
philosophy, which is a philosophy so old that it seems like new. And in
the co-operative movement there is a chance for a real united front and
for a peaceful and ethical accomplishment of our aims. But where there
is no chance at co-operative enterprise right now, in factories and on
ships, what then?

"The Popes have hit the nail on the head. 'No man may outrage with
impunity that human dignity which God Himself treats with reverence ...
Religion teaches the rich man and employer that their work people are
not their slaves; that they must respect in every man his dignity as a
man and as a Christian; that labor is an honorable employment: and that
it is shameful and inhuman to treat men like chattels to make money by,
or to look upon them merely as so much muscle or physical power.'

"These are fundamental principles which the A. F. of L. has neglected to
bring out. They have based their appeal on enlightened self-interest, a
phrase reeking with selfishness and containing a warning and a threat. A
warning to the workers of the world that they are working for themselves
alone, and not as 'members one of another.' One can see how it has
worked out in this country. What percentage of the workers are
organized? A fraction only of the laboring men of the country. And how
has the highly organized workman cared for his poorer brother? There has
grown up an aristocracy of labor, so that it is an irksome fact that
bricklayers and printers receive more than farmers or editors in the
necessary goods of this world--in goods which we should strive for in
order that we may have those God-given means to develop to the full and
achieve the Kingdom of Heaven.

"We are not losing sight of the fact that our end is spiritual. We are
not losing sight of the fact that these better conditions of labor are
means to an end. But the labor movement has lost sight of this fact. The
leaders have forgotten such a thing as a philosophy of labor. They have
not given to the worker the philosophy of labor, and they have betrayed
him.

"And the inarticulate rank and file throughout the world is rising up in
rebellion, and are being labeled Communists for so doing, for refusing
to accept the authority of such leaders, which they very rightly do not
consider just authority. They intuitively know better than their leaders
what they are looking for. But they allow themselves to be misled and
deceived.

"We have so positive a program that we need all our energy, we have to
bend all our forces, material and spiritual, to this end, to promulgate
it. Let us uphold our positive program of changing the social order.

"But let us too examine the Communist means to the end which they claim
they are working for, a true brotherhood of man. We do not talk about a
classless society, because we acknowledge functional classes as opposed
to acquisitive classes.

"We agree with this end, but we do not agree on the means to attain it.

"The Communists say: 'All men are our brothers except the capitalists,
so we will kill them off.' They do not actually believe in the dignity
of man as a human being, because they try to set off one or another
class of men and say 'they are not our brothers and never will be. So
let us liquidate them,' and then to point their argument they say with
scorn, 'Do you ever think to convert J. P. Morgan, or Rockefeller or
Charlie Schwab?'

"They are protesting against man's brutality to man, and at the same
time they perpetuate it. It is like having one more war to end all wars.
We disagree with this technique of class war, without which the
Communist says the brotherhood of man can never be achieved.

"'Nothing will be achieved until the worker rises up in arms and
forcibly takes the position that is his,' the Communist says. 'Your
movement, which trusts to peaceful means, radical though it may seem, is
doomed to failure.'

"We admit that we may seem to fail, but we recall to our readers the
ostensible failure of Christ when he died on the Cross, forsaken by all
His followers. Out of this failure a new world sprang up. We recall to
our readers the folly of the Cross which St. Paul talks about.

"When we participate in strikes, when we go out on picket lines and
distribute leaflets, when we speak at strike meetings, we are there
because we are reaching the workers when they are massed together for
action. We are taking advantage of a situation. We may not agree that to
strike was the wise thing to do in that particular case. We believe that
the work of organization must be thorough before any strike action
occurs, unless indeed the strike is a spontaneous one which is the
outcome of unbearable conditions.

"We oppose all use of violence as un-Christian. We do not believe in
persuading scabs with clubs. They are workers, too, and the reason they
are scabs is because the work of organization has been neglected.

"We oppose the misuse of private property while we uphold the right of
private property. The Holy Father says that 'as many as possible of the
workers should become owners,' and how else in many cases except by
developing the co-operative ideal?

"While we are upholding co-operatives as a part of the Christian social
order, we are upholding at the same time unions, as organizations of
workers wherein they can be indoctrinated and taught to rebuild the
social order. While we stress the back-to-the-land movement so that the
worker may be 'deproletarianized,' we are not going to leave the city to
the Communist.

"Month by month, in every struggle, in every strike, on every picket
line, we shall do our best to join with the worker in his struggle for
recognition as a man and not as a chattel. We reiterate the slogan of
the old I.W.W.'s: 'An injury to one is an injury to all.' St. Paul says
'When the health of one member of the Mystical Body suffers, the health
of the whole body is lowered.'

"We are all members, one of another, in the Mystical Body of Christ, so
let us work together for Christian solidarity."
