% On Pilgrimage - April 1948
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1948, 1, 2, 11.

*Summary: Meditation on love--our need for love, God's lavish and
foolish love, how hard love can be, how others will disapprove of loving
the poor, even Lenin and Marx. Urges readers to come to a retreat at
Newburgh for renewal and refreshment. Welcomes the Spring warmth and
Peter Maurin's coming to the farm. (DDLW \#467).*

Whenever I groan within myself and think how hard it is to keep writing
about love in these times of tension and strife which may at any moment
become for us all a time of terror, I think to myself, "What else is the
world interested in? What else do we all want, each one of us, except to
love and be loved, in our families, in our work, in all our
relationships. God is Love. Love casts out fear. Even the most ardent
revolutionist, seeking to change the world, to overturn the tables of
the money changers, is trying to make a world where it is easier for
people to love, to stand in that relationship with each other of love.
We want with all our hearts to love, to be loved. And not just in the
family but to look upon all as our mothers, sisters, brothers, children.
It is when we love the most intensely and most humanly, that we can
recognize how tepid is our love for others. The keenness and intensity
of love brings with it suffering, of course, but joy too because it is a
foretaste of heaven. I often think in relation to my love for little
Beckie, Susie and Eric: "That is the way I must love every child and
want to serve them, cherish them and protect them." Even that
relationship which is set off from other loves by that slight change in
phraseology (instead of "Loving," one is "in love") the very change in
terminology, denoting a living in love, a dwelling in love at all times,
being bathed in love, so that every waking thought, word, deed and
suffering is permeated by that love, yes, that relationship above all
should give us not only a taste of the love of God for us, but the kind
of love we should have for all.

When you love people, you see all the good in them, all the Christ in
them. God sees Christ, His Son, in us and loves us. And so we should see
Christ in others, *and nothing else,* and love them. There can never be
enough of it. There can never be enough thinking about it. St. John of
the Cross said that where there was no love, put love and you would take
out love. This sounds rather clumsy, and I would like to get the exact
quotation and translation if some of our readers would send it in to me.
The principle certainly works. I've seen my friend Sister Peter Claver
with that warm friendliness of hers which is partly natural (she is half
Jew and half Irish), but which is intensified and made enduring by
grace, come into a place which is cold with tension and conflict, and
warm the house with her love.

And this is not easy. Everyone will try to kill that love in you, even
your nearest and dearest; at least, they will try to prune it. "Don't
you know this, that and the other thing, about this person? He or she
did this. If you don't want to hear it, you must hear. It is for your
good to hear it. It is my duty to tell you, and it is your duty to take
recognition of it. You must stop loving, modify your loving, show your
disapproval. You cannot possibly love if you pretend you do, you are a
hypocrite and the truth is not in you. You are contributing to the
delinquency of that person by your sentimental blindness. It is such
people as you who add to the sum total of confusion and wickedness and
soft appeasement and compromise and the policy of expediency in this
world. You are to blame for communism, for industrial capitalism, and
finally for hell on earth."

The antagonism often rises to a crescendo of vituperation, an
intensification of opposition on all sides. You are quite borne down by
it. And the only Christian answer is *love,*t o the very end, to the
laying down of your life.

To see only the good, the Christ, in others! Perhaps if we thought of
how Karl Marx was called "Papa Marx" by all the children on the street,
if we knew and remembered how he told fairy stories to his children, how
he suffered hunger and poverty and pain, how he sat by the body of his
dead child and had no money for coffin or funeral, perhaps such thoughts
as these would make us love him and his followers. Dear God, for the
memory of that dead child, of that faithful wife, grant his stormy
spirit "a place of refreshment, light and peace."

And there was Lenin. He hungered and thirsted and at times he had no
fixed abode. Mme. Krupskaya, his widow, said that he loved to go into
the peace of the pine woods and hunt mushrooms like old Mrs. Dew down at
Easton did, and we with her one October. He lived one time in the slums
of Paris, and he lived on horse meat when he had meat, and he started
schools for the poor and the workers. "He went about doing good." Is
this blasphemy? How many people are dying and going to God their Father
and saying sadly, "We have not so much as heard that there is a Holy
Spirit." And how will they hear if none preaches to them? And what kind
of shepherds have many of them had? Ezekiel said in his day, "woe to the
shepherds that feed themselves and not their sheep!"

And if there have been preachers, has there been love? If people will
not listen, one can still love, one can still find Christ in them to
love, and love is stronger than death. Dear God, may Lenin too find a
place of refreshment, light and peace. Or don't we believe in
retroactive prayers? There is no time with God.

Newburgh Retreat
---

It is an easy thing to talk about love, but it is something to be
proven, to be suffered, to be learned. That's why we have that retreat
house at Newburgh. Last week after my return from Berkeley Springs, I
went up on a foggy day, taking a train at Grand Central because the bus
which leaves at 6: 30 and passes our door at Newburgh was on strike. The
train was slow, and the ferry slower. A fog which kept us floundering in
the middle of the river for half an hour was so heavy that it was hard
to breathe. It was a great relief from oppression to reach the high
ground, where the retreat house stands, six miles inland, and to get to
bed early after the oppression of the city.

It is always a terrible thing to come back to Mott street. To come back
in a driving rain, to men crouched on the stairs, huddled in doorways,
without overcoats because they sold them perhaps the week before when it
was warm, to satisfy hunger or thirst, who knows. Those without love
would say, "It serves them right, drinking up their clothes." God help
us if we got just what we deserved! It is a terrible thing to see the
ugliness and poverty of the cities, to see what man has made of man. I
needed those few days at Newburgh to brace myself for work. Fr. Anthony,
a young Benedictine from Newton, N. J., was with us that week, giving a
retreat on the sacraments and the conferences I was in time for
continued what I had been pondering of the love of God for man and man
for man. "From Genesis to Revelation," he said, in one conference, "it
is the story of God's love for man. All the story of God's dealing with
man is a love story. Some say the Old Testament tells of God's justice
and the New of his love. But there is not a page but emphasizes God's
folly in every forgiving and drawing man back to him." I remembered the
book of Osee. the prophet and Holy Man who was commanded by God to love
and marry a harlot, who had children by him, and who left him again and
again, having children also by her lovers. And how Osee again and again
took her back. How he must have been scorned by his generation, he a
holy man, so weak and uxorious, so soft-minded that again and again, "he
allured her" to him, on one occasion even buying her back from her
lover, even providing her while she was with her lover, with corn and
wine and oil. And God even commanded it so that down through the ages
there would be this example of God's love for a faithless people, of the
folly of love, a foretaste of the folly of the Cross. If we could only
learn to be such fools! God give us the strength to persist in trying to
learn such folly. We had three conferences a day, of an hour each, and a
15-minute period of prayer after each conference. There was silence for
the week, and manual labor, in the house and out. There was rosary after
lunch, and a holy hour midnight on Thursday. Every morning the day began
with prime the first prayers of the Church for the day (after Matins and
Lauds) and then there was a sung Mass, the first mass in the Kyriale for
the festive season, and it was pure beauty that strengthened the heart
to learn to love.

There was just a handful of us there, since we have not begun to send
out our retreat notices for the year. We are urging our friends to study
the following dates and figure out their vacations, and try to plan to
spend some time with us this summer and fall. We are hoping to have two
study weeks with Fr. Victor White, former editor of Blackfriar's in
England, and Fr. Oesterreicher of Austria. The latter week will be
devoted to Scripture. I'm going to ask Fr. White to tell us about Eric
Gill, his life and work, in part of his week, since Mrs. Gill wrote
recently and told us he had long been an old friend of the family. His
articles on psychiatry in Blackfriars have been followed with great
interest by many of our group.

MAY 1 there will be a study week-end on WORK.

MEMORIAL DAY week-end there will be a retreat for men conducted by Fr.
Francis Meenan. Holy Ghost Father from Norwalk.

JUNE 13-19--first study week.

JULY. 4th weekend--a basic retreat for women.

JULY 18--Fr. Veales, Josephite from Washington, D. C., will give a basic
retreat for men.

August 14 there will be another study week.

LABOR DAY week-end Fr. Purcell, an Augustinian, will give a retreat for
families, and there will be several girls to care for the children, who
will have their own little retreat at the same time. Julia Porcelli will
be one of the girls, and she will have art classes for the children over
the holiday. It will be a WORK week-end for the children, emphasizing
the co-creative as well as the penitential aspect of work.

There will be extra week-ends and also through the fall, to be announced
later.

We cannot over-emphasize the importance of these retreats and beg our
readers to try to plan to come to some of them. While it is true that
love sweetens all of life, and makes light of pain and suffering and
brings us to the happiness we all desire, one must learn to love, and
there is no place better than a retreat house to learn such lessons. We
must withdraw for a time to renew our strength for the great struggle of
the apostolate. Without the use of our spiritual weapon of love, which
includes prayer and penance and work and poverty and suffering, our
future is harsh and ugly to contemplate. Great struggles lie before us,
in this era of war and revolution through which we are passing, and
which we in America have not begun to suffer as yet. We must prepare, so
we do beg you to come and help us. A brother helped by a brother is a
strong city.

For the Poor, the Little Ones
---

The retreat house, of course, is not just for our readers who can afford
to take train or bus and get to us for this time not only of rigor but
of delight ("All the way to heaven is heaven, since He said, 'I am the
Way'.") but it is also for the poor, the lame, the halt and the blind.
So we recommend that you bring someone who could not otherwise make a
retreat. We always have a few from our House of Hospitality, and come
the summer, we are also going out on the highways and byways and
persuade our brothers in. There is many a sick one just out of Bellevue,
or off the breadline who needs "refreshment, light and peace," here and
now. The retreat house is for us all, but most especially for those who
can go no place else for lack of funds or because difference in race,
color and creed, has kept them from this sweet rest of a retreat. God
will raise up amongst us all those he wishes to work for Him, and He
will give us all the strength we need for the part we all will have to
play.

The Farm
---

The farm of ninety-six acres, attached to the retreat house. is going to
provide meat and vegetables also, for our breadline at Mott street. It
was a wonderful sight to see John Filliger out there on the horizon at
the end of a long field, ploughing with his team and the hound dog
trailing along behind. A number of the fields are ploughed now, and the
greenhouse is filled with cabbages and tomato plants, not to speak of
Spring salads. Hans and Charlie and Louis Owen and a new arrival by name
of Murphy are busily at work these spring days and before he left Fr.
Anthony blessed the house and the fields. Our chapel has been greatly
enlarged, thanks to Hans Tunneson, and the conference room floor
painted, and we are ready for our friends and fellow workers.

Peter
---

Thanks to several of our readers, Peter Maurin is going to have the
hospital bed that can be cranked up at the side, and as soon as it
arrives at Newburgh, Peter will be taken up to the farm again, where for
some hours every day he can sit under the crab apple tree out in front
of the adobe-like house which the men and the priest share. Nothing is
blooming yet, no buds show green, and the wind is still harsh. But the
spring sun is warming and after the desperately hard winter on Mott
street, the warmth is a touch of God's love on us all.

This issue of the paper is given over so much to arguments against
Universal Military Training, Conscription, and the fog of threatened war
hangs so heavy over us all, we beg the prayers of all our readers that
we may hold our stand with strong love, with warm love, because without
it we know that all arguments will be unavailing.
