% On Pilgrimage - September 1949
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1949, 1, 2.

*Summary: Announces a birth and eulogizes a long-time worker, John
Anthony Curran. Tells of starting the farm at Newburgh, NY, and all
their unpaid bills hoping someone will send money. Thanks readers for
condolences on Peter Maurin's death. (DDLW \#473).*

Everything happens here," three young Maryknoll students said as they
left us after a two weeks visit. Births and deaths, the joys and sorrows
that go with the crises of our daily life at Mott street. All our
visitors were hoping that Marjorie Hughes' baby would be born before
they left, but Lois Schumacher from Chicago departed, and the three
seminarians and various other guests, and still no baby. Then one
Wednesday night, after a meeting in our courtyard where Bob Ludlow was
speaking, after the crowd had dispersed and had wandered around to the
"Muni" for coffee, and there was no one around to stay with the children
while Joe accompanied Marge to the hospital, her time came. She left the
house at eleven-thirty and the baby was born at twelve-thirty, a boy,
eight pounds, James Matthew by name. The hospital called it Thursday,
but by God's time, not daylight saving, the child was born on the feast
of St. Lawrence, always one of my favorite saints. When there was danger
of the estates of the Church being confiscated by the State, he sold
them all and gave them to the poor! A good example for our time.

Another Death
-------------

The birth of a baby is a joyful event so I write of that first. A week
later, John Anthony Curran died. Many of our readers and correspondents
will remember him as a most ardent disciple of Peter Maurin.

I had been visiting my daughter for a week down in West Virginia and
returned home to find John very sick indeed. He had had several serious
operations two years before and had been in a very weakened condition
ever since. He and Cecilia his wife lived up one flight in the rear
house at Mott Street, in a two-room apartment, adjoining our clothes
room and laundry. The only running water they had was that in the
laundry and the noise and airlessness of the place was oppressive in the
extreme heat this summer. John lay there Sunday morning and talked to me
of Peter's sanctity. "I haven't got that sanctity," he said seriously,
"I've got the intellectual appreciation for all that Peter taught me,
and I certainly appreciate how much God has given me in letting me have
the opportunity of knowing and working with such a man. But no, I
haven't his sanctity."

And I thought, "what a variety of saints there are," looking around at
John's poverty, voluntarily accepted, to be with the poor, to work with
the poor, to talk to whoever would listen about the things of God as
taught in the liturgy; and the things of the world, the history of
things past, what to do now in order to make the future better.

St. Paul's
----------

That Sunday morning John was very weak. But it was the day Jack English
was to be "clothed" at St. Paul's Abbey, Newton, New Jersey, and the
crowd of us were to go out there. It was a joyful occasion and we had a
happy afternoon with Jack. Tom, Bob, Charles, Natalie, Irene and Agnes
stayed for supper at the Abbey, but Catherine Odlivak and I hastened
back on the bus, a beautiful trip, eating our supper of French fried
potatoes, purchased at a roadside stand, by the way. It was a night of
the fiesta, the eve of the feast of the Assumption, and street singers,
men and women, with loud speakers to increase their already gargantuan
voices, were on the band stand which is built for this feast each year,
right across the street from us. We got back to find the concert in full
blast, and Cecilia, John's wife, in despair because John could no longer
move himself, and she could not help him. With the help of Kay
Brinkworth, who has had experience at St. Francis home where she had to
move patients many times the size of John, we got him moved, his bed and
clothes changed, because it was a very hot night.

John did not mind the noise. He was in the rear building so the sound
was not so piercing, deflected as it was by a five-story building
directly in front of him. "There are other noises that are worse,"
Cecilia said. "The neighbors are always taking the clean clothes down at
midnight and the sound of screeching pulleys is almost more than one can
stand. This noise is a happy noise."

John could not eat, so we had to go over to the Hughes' for ice cubes to
make lemonade. (They are luxuriating in a second hand gas-ice box this
summer, purchased for \$20 and set up by Joe.)

It was fifteen years that John was in the work. He started to come to
the meetings back on Charles Street and moved in with us when we came to
Mott Street in 1936. He travelled with Peter, he helped Frank O'Donnell
and Carl Paulson build on St. Benedict's farm. It was the first stone
work they had done, and he learned it from a book. He worked at Easton,
at Alcuin, and at Mott Street. He was critic as well as worker, New
England perfectionist that he was, and in his forced inactivity the last
years of his life, it was hard for him to see mistakes, or what he
thought were mistakes, developments, defections, and the slowness with
which things moved, the lack of accomplishment. Women working from day
to day, from meal to meal, with the immediate, did not get discouraged
as men did, I used to tell him. It was the men who had the vision, Peter
used to say, and the women followed the men who had the vision, and
helped them accomplish it. It was up to the men to keep the vision
clear, but not much would be accomplished without the women, I always
added. "Oh, women!" John would snort, because he was noted for his
impatience with them. He was always quoting St. Paul at me, and he was
still doing it the day he went to the hospital.

On the feast of the Assumption, Monday morning, the priest from Precious
Blood Church around the corner, came in his robes through the street,
barefooted and in sandals, and brought Viaticum. John confessed,
received Holy Communion and was anointed. "And now, if I were to die
today," he said happily, "I would go straight to heaven."

I remembered Fr. Reinhold's article on Extreme Unction which appeared in
the Commonweal some years ago, and wished I had it to read to him. What
beautiful emphasis he placed on the power of the Sacrament!

Those were the last words I had with John. In the afternoon the
ambulance came and took him to the Veteran's hospital up on Kingsbridge
Road, and there he died, Wednesday night, August 17. Cecilia, Irene,
Charlie, Julia and I took turns reading him the psalms. He was brought
to Precious Blood Church for a requiem Mass which we all sang, and then
his body was brought to Lewiston, Maine, where his mother and sister
still live. As a young man he had gone to Annapolis but did not finish
because of illness. He has served in the Coast Guard in the first World
War, but since he had been with **The Catholic Worker**, he had been a
pacifist. He was fifty-five years old when he died.

Retreats
--------

I am writing now at the farm where we have been more crowded this summer
than ever before. The youngest member of the community is Teddy Cizek,
who is here with his four-year old brother while his mother has an
operation in New York. This little family have been the guests of a
couple of members of the YCW in New York who have an apartment above the
headquarters. Now that we are taking care of some of their guests, they
are taking care of one of ours. It delights us to see this practice of
hospitality. Oh, for a Christ-room in every home! Women and children,
separated from husband and father, hundreds of them, at the Municipal
Lodging house in New York, and on the other hand, empty buildings,
boarded up buildings, buildings that could be made into apartments for
these homeless people! Little interest is evinced in them. The Lodging
house has become the Marshalsea of the present day, but we have not a
Dickens to bring the plight of these families before the people.

Just this last month an apartment fell vacant across the street from us
on Mott Street. The janitor had lived in it, alone, and he suddenly
died. We had the chance to rent it, buy the furniture for fifty dollars,
and move in a family from the lodging house, a widow and four children.
They are already considered to be on relief, so when they were moved
into the newly painted clean apartment, with sufficient but meager
furniture, they were automatically cared for by the city which is trying
to do its share in this emergency. Holy Mother the City, Holy Mother the
State,--both are tender and merciful to the poor. But the members of
Holy Mother the Church are remiss. We are not doing our share.

Blue Prints
-----------

We have the land at Newburgh, and we have several men who would help
build. Fr. Buckley, of the Brooklyn Catholic Charities office, says that
he has a building group also who would come out and give a hand week
ends, which means one day's work. We have the land and the labor. But we
have no funds for building materials. As a matter of fact, we still have
a bill for building materials not paid yet with a local dealer who is
most patient. Pope Pius said in a talk to a group of nuns who were
engaged in caring for the poor, "Never be afraid to run up bills for the
Lord's work." An encouraging thought. But our bills are so high now, and
there are so many long unpaid, that we wonder how we can get through the
summer until our Fall appeal goes out. Only yesterday, the undertaker,
Mr. Walsh, came around to remind me that the bill for Peter Maurin's
funeral, \$650, was still unpaid. The humiliations of poverty! Tom, who
has charge of the funds, has been hard pressed to pay butcher, baker,
and grocer through the summer, feeding the living, caring for the line
that increases at our door in Mott street, and for a family of thirty or
so who are here at Maryfarm all the time. One cannot raise enough for
all.

Bills
-----

On various feasts I have rather timidly asked St. Anthony, St. Joseph,
the Blessed Mother, and today St. Rose, to please move someone's heart
to send us a sizable gift, that would get rid of some of our bills, so
that we could breathe easier, take courage, gird our loins for the ever
increasing struggle. Just a little reminder that the saints are with us.
Maybe they want us to groan in our poverty. Maybe they want us to feel
the same heavy, almost hopeless burden that the family does these days
as bills pile up, doctor's bills, hospital bills, grocery bills, so that
you never get out from under, you never draw a free breath but are
always scheming and planning and wondering how to make ends meet.

Still, we keep on asking, "show me a token for good." St. Joseph sent us
five-hundred dollars on his feast day through the will of one of our
readers, once many years ago. But it seems to us we have had drops in
the bucket for a long time now.

"Sow, and you will reap," Fr. Roy used to say. "If you are saving to pay
a mortgage on the Church or school, and had only five hundred or five
thousand in the bank, get rid of it all, sow it all, and you will be
rewarded a hundred fold. God has promised it. It sounds foolish, but if
you need money, sow money. It will come back to you. Cast your bread on
the waters."

So we sow all the time, whatever we have, and we beg our readers to do
the same. Perhaps some reader will look at our broad fields here at
Maryfarm and decide to sow a few houses on it, to take care of the few
families, and what mansions in heaven they will receive in exchange!

Postscript
----------

In the September issue of Blackfriar's there is an article about Peter
Maurin which I wrote at the request of Fr. Conrad Peplar the editor.
Since I took part of a chapter I had written on the life of Peter and
used that, it contains, I find, many more facts about Peter's life than
I had given in the article which I wrote about him for our own paper. On
my desk there are requests from several other magazines for articles
about Peter Maurin and the Catholic Worker. There must be a great deal
of repetition in writing articles such as these, but I like to remember
how much Peter had to repeat over and over again to visitors, the basic
ideas of the work, about voluntary poverty, manual labor, "being what
you want the other fellow to be." We must repeat too, and remembering
how many times St. Paul told his story, remembering the four gospels,
will help in writing about Peter, the lay apostle of our times.

Thank You
---------

While we were mailing out the July-August issue of the paper, I began to
remember all the things we had not put in the paper. I had neglected to
thank all our friends for their letters and condolences on the death of
Peter, the Masses offered for him, the prayers of his friends. There
were beautiful comments made in **America**, in **Orate Fratres** (his
death was coupled with that of Cardinal Suhard of Paris), in the
**Commonweal**, in **Osservatore Romano**, and other papers and
magazines. Agnes Bird is making up a scrap book of all the clippings and
letters received and it will be precious to us and interesting to all
the visitors who come in to Mott street. We hope our readers will
understand the pressure of work this summer which has made much letter
writing impossible and excuse us for not being prompt in answering them.
I always think of this column as a letter to our readers and hope that
they too feel it as such.
