%Letter to An Agnostic
% Dorothy Day

America, 5 (August 4, 1934):390.

*Summary: Answers the assertion of a young agnostic that religion is
morbid. Recalls the struggle of St. Theresa of Avila as well as her own
efforts to find joy in God. Suggests that the arrogance and
rebelliousness of youth can deprive the soul of life. (DDLW \#53).*


Reprinted from **America**, August 4, 1934, with permission of America
Press, Inc., c.1934. For subscription information, call 1-800-627-9533
or visit
[*http://www.americamagazine.org*](http://www.americamagazine.org/).

Reading the eighth chapter of St. Teresa's autobiography recalled to me
your objection to religion as being morbid.

This is quite a natural feeling on your part and it is a very common
attitude toward religion. If those who spend several hours a day in
prayer, and hours more in spiritual reading, as she did, in a *willful*
search for God, had these feelings, these struggles -- how much more
those who are scarcely touched by faith or hope?

You know the reaction of my friends to religion, that it is a deliberate
turning away from life. We Catholics know, with a supernatural
knowledge, not with a worldly knowledge, that this is not so, just as we
know the existence of God and love Him with our will, which is a power
of our souls.

St. Teresa struggled for twenty years, she said, to avoid the occasions
of sin. To know what she was talking about, what she meant by sin, it is
necessary to understand the situation she was in.

She had entered the convent at the age of eighteen. The Carmelite
convent was a large one, containing so many nuns that it was difficult
to feed them all. It was the custom of the day to send unmarried
daughters, widows, ladies who wished to retire from the world to the
convent and yet they did not retire from the world. There were a great
many visitors. St. Teresa herself said that one of the reasons so many
visitors came was to bring food to the nuns, and they received their
callers because there was so little food in the convent that they needed
to eke out their resources in that way. Later when St. Teresa was making
her foundations of the reformed Carmelites, she saw to it that her nuns
had enough to eat.

St. Teresa knew that she was far from leading the life she wished to
lead when she entered the convent. She wished to give herself up wholly
to God. She wished everything she did, every word she said, to tend to
that end. But she was a gay creature. The story is that she went to be
received in the convent in a bright red dress. She was full of vitality,
life. She wished to live abundantly. The very qualities in her which
urged her to give herself to God, drew her to her fellows. She had an
abundant love for them, an interest in them, and there was much time
spent in conversations.

The more her life was involved with her fellows, the more she was drawn
to them, the more she felt she was drawing away from God.

She was making little account of venial sins, she said; she was not
avoiding the occasions of them. She felt that she was a sinful creature
and said so many times in her autobiography. This does not mean anything
scandalous -- that the convent ladies sat around and received unseemly
visits, ate or drank to excess (as the monks were accused of doing), or
indulged in vicious talk or gossip.

But St. Teresa had so great a desire for perfection that any time
engaged in idle talk (the most innocent idle talk) seemed to her to be
deliberately stolen from God. She knew what she wanted, she knew that
there was a better life for her, but she had a struggle to attain it.

She tells in this eighth chapter how she was kept from prayer.

> The sadness I felt on entering the oratory was so great that it
> required all the courage I had to force myself in. They say of me that
> my courage is not slight, and it is known that God has given me a
> courage beyond that of a woman; but I have made a bad use of it.

She told, too, of watching the hour glass, of how she was filled with
distractions, of what a constant hard struggle it was to force herself
prayer and spiritual reading.

And these struggles went on for twenty years!

"I wished to live," she wrote, " but I saw clearly that I was not
living, but rather wrestling with shadow of death; there was no one to
give me life, and I was not able to take it."

This is the *morbidness*that you mean, I know.

If St. Teresa, with her knowledge and insight and the graces God gave
her to go on struggling, felt that she was wrestling with the shadow of
death, how one who knows nothing of religion must shy off from it every
time the matter enters his consciousness!

The shadow of death she was talking of was the life she was leading,
purposeless, disordered, a constant succumbing to second-best, to the
less-than-perfect which she desired. But human nature will try to
persuade us that the life of prayer is death, is a turning away from
life.

As a convert I can say these things, knowing how many times I turned
away, almost in disgust, from the idea of God and giving myself up to
Him.

I know the feeling of uneasiness, of weariness, the feeling of strain
put upon the soul from driving it, instead of abandoning it to God.

And how any one can persist in the search for God without the assistance
of the Church and the advice of her confessors, with the experience of
generations behind them, I do not know.

The thing you do not understand is the elemental fact that our beginning
and our last end is God. Once that fact is accepted, half the struggle
is won. If we wish to go on struggling, not to be content with the
minimum of virtue, of duty done, of "just getting by," then we should
account it a great honor that God has given us these desires, to serve
Him and to use ourselves completely in His service.

You do not see this, you do not believe it. Every now and then, when you
think of religion in your busy life, you end by turning from it with
aversion.

You are very young, scarcely twenty-one, and you have not yet really
felt the need, the yearning toward God.

You have not been in such agony and misery that you turned to One whom
you knew not and said: "God help me!" Or if you did, you were ashamed of
doing it afterward, feeling it to be cowardice to turn in misery to a
God in whom you did not believe.

I felt this despair when I lay in jail for fifteen days (after
demonstrating for the rights of political prisoners), contemplating the
fundamental misery of human existence, a misery which would remain even
if social justice were achieved and a state of Utopia prevailed. For you
cannot pace the floor of a barred cell, or lie on your back on a hard
cot watching a gleam of sunlight travel slowly, oh, so slowly, across
the room, without coming to the realization that until the heart and
soul of man is changed, there is no hope of happiness for him.

On the other hand, you have not felt the ecstasy, the thankfulness, the
joy, which caused the Psalmist to cry out, "My heart and my flesh
rejoice for the living God." "My soul longeth and fainteth for the
courts of the Lord."

St. John of the Cross, who lived at the same time as St. Teresa and was
her good friend, tells about the different stages of prayer and how the
first state is the purgative state. He explains how though we feel this
joy and this longing of God, a joy which is so sweet that even the
remembrance of it is a constant spur to us, still our own imperfections
give us constant suffering and unease, and the struggle for the
spiritual life is a wearisome one, and that we must not expect to find
ease in prayer.

He makes us understand this distaste, this recoil from religion. This
lethargy comes from a consciousness of that immanence of the struggle,
the fact that it is unceasing and will go on to death, and we often
think that sheer thoughtless paganism would be a relief.

You do not know how long I struggled. How I turned *to*God, and turned
*from* Him, again and again; I, too, felt that distaste, I, too, felt
that religion had a morbid quality.

It is the struggle of the flesh against the spirit. It is the struggle
of the natural man against that in him that is Divine. (I am going to
write you later about the flesh and the spirit, the sensual and the
spiritual, for you have an entirely wrong idea as to what Karl Adam
calls "the antitheses with which Christianity is concerned.")

I can understand what you mean by morbid, and can understand how no
matter how often you are drawn you are also repelled. If you only knew,
and could in intellectual humility submit yourself to the rule which
makes all so plain and clear!

We have "a rule of life" which is easy to follow, provided we listen to
the wise counsels of such people as St. Teresa, St. Francis de Sales, de
Caussade, Father Considine. I mention these names because they are the
first ones that come to mind who have been of help this past year.

St. Teresa understood that weariness of the soul; St. Francis tells us
to be gentle with ourselves; de Caussade tells us to abandon ourselves
to Divine Providence, and Father Considine tells us to have more faith
in God as a kind Father who is so far above our earthly fathers that He
will forgive us all our sins, even the greatest, who will not give us a
stone when we ask for bread.

We are taught that our souls need exercise just as our body does,
otherwise it will never be healthy and well, and if it is not is a
healthy state, of course we will feel morbid. And prayer is that
exercise for the soul, just as bending and stretching is the exercise of
the body. It is intellectual pride, the arrogance of youth which makes
the physical act of prayer difficult.

You submit yourself to the dogma of Communism, you accept the authority
of Karl Marx and Lenin, you accept the philosophy of Communism and know
while you are accepting a "hard saying," that in all likelihood you will
be persecuted for this acceptance.

Perhaps the main trouble is that to you Christianity is too simple. To
you Christianity is the accepted thing, so you rebel, and knowing that
your rebellion deprives your soul of life, you turn on religion and call
it morbid.
