% We Go on Record: the CW Resonse to Hiroshima
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, September 1945, 1.

*Summary: Denounces the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and is outraged at
the jubilation in the press. Juxtaposes words and images that contrast
the evil of the bomb's destruction with God's creative love. Keywords:
pacifism, war (DDLW \#554).*

Mr, Truman was jubilant. President Truman. True man; what a strange
name, come to think of it. We refer to Jesus Christ as true God and true
Man. Truman is a true man of his time in that he was jubilant. He was
not a son of God, brother of Christ, brother of the Japanese, jubilating
as he did. He went from table to table on the cruiser which was bringing
him home from the Big Three conference, telling the great news;
"jubilant" the newspapers said. Jubilate Deo. We have killed 318,000
Japanese.

That is, we hope we have killed them, the Associated Press, on page one,
column one of the Herald Tribune, says. The effect is hoped for, not
known. It is to be hoped they are vaporized, our Japanese brothers --
scattered, men, women and babies, to the four winds, over the seven
seas. Perhaps we will breathe their dust into our nostrils, feel them in
the fog of New York on our faces, feel them in the rain on the hills of
Easton.

Jubilate Deo. President Truman was jubilant. We have created. We have
created destruction. We have created a new element, called Pluto. Nature
had nothing to do with it.

Created to Destroy
===

"A cavern below Columbia was the bomb's cradle," born not that men might
live, but that men might be killed. Brought into being in a cavern, and
then tried in a desert place, in the midst of tempest and lightning,
tried out, and then again on the eve of the Feast of the Transfiguration
of our Lord Jesus Christ, on a far off island in the eastern hemisphere,
tried out again, this "new weapon which conceivably might wipe out
mankind, and perhaps the planet itself."

"Dropped on a town, one bomb would be equivalent to a severe earthquake
and would utterly destroy the place. A scientific brain trust has solved
the problem of how to confine and release almost unlimited energy. It is
impossible yet to measure its effects."

"We have spent two billion on the greatest scientific gamble in history
and won," said President Truman jubilantly.

The papers list the scientists (the murderers) who are credited with
perfecting this new weapon. One outstanding authority "who earlier had
developed a powerful electrical bombardment machine called the
cyclotron, was Professor O. E. Lawrence, a Nobel prize winner of the
University of California. In the heat of the race to unlock the atom, he
built the world's most powerful atom smashing gun, a machine whose
electrical projectiles carried charges equivalent to 25,000,000 volts.
But such machines were found in the end to be unnecessary. The atom of
Uranium-235 was smashed with surprising ease. Science discovered that
not sledgehammer blows, but subtle taps from slow traveling neutrons
managed more on a tuning technique were all that were needed to
disintegrate the Uranium-235 atom."

(Remember the tales we used to hear, that one note of a violin, if that
note could be discovered, could collapse the Empire State Building.
Remember too, that God's voice was heard not in the great and strong
wind, not in the earthquake, not in the fire, but "in the whistling of a
gentle air.")

Scientists, army officers, great universities (Notre Dame included), and
captains of industry -- all are given credit lines in the press for
their work of preparing the bomb -- and other bombs, the President
assures us, are in production now.

Great Britain controls the supply of uranium ore, in Canada and
Rhodesia. We are making the bombs. This new great force will be used for
good, the scientists assured us. And then they wiped out a city of
318,000. This was good. The President was jubilant.

Today's paper with its columns of description of the new era, the atomic
era, which this colossal slaughter of the innocents has ushered in, is
filled with stories covering every conceivable phase of the new
discovery. Pictures of the towns and the industrial plants where the
parts are made are spread across the pages. In the forefront of the town
of Oak Ridge, Tennessee is a chapel, a large comfortable-looking chapel
benignly settled beside the plant. And the scientists making the first
tests in the desert prayed, one newspaper account said.

God, Our Creator
===

Yes, God is still in the picture. God is not mocked. Today, the day of
this so great news, God made a madman dance and talk, who had not spoken
for twenty years. God sent a typhoon to damage the carrier Hornet. God
permitted a fog to obscure vision and a bomber crashed into the Empire
State Building. God permits these things. We have to remember it. We are
held in God's hands, all of us, and President Truman too, and these
scientists who have created death, but will use it for good. He, God,
holds our life and our happiness, our sanity and our health; our lives
are in His hands. He is our Creator. Creator.

And as I write, Pigsie, who works in Secaucus, New Jersey, feeding hogs,
and cleaning out the excrement of the hogs, who comes in once a month to
find beauty and surcease and glamour and glory in the drink of the
Bowery, trying to drive the hell and the smell out of his nostrils and
his life, sleeps on our doorstep, in this best and most advanced and
progressive of all possible worlds. And as I write, our cat, Rainbow,
slinks by with a shrill rat in her jaws, out of the kitchen closet here
at Mott Street. Here in this greatest of cities which covered the cavern
where this stupendous discovery was made, which institutes an era of
unbelievable richness and power and glory for man â€¦.

Everyone says, "I wonder what the Pope thinks of it?" How everyone turns
to the Vatican for judgement, even though they do not seem to listen to
the voice there! But our Lord Himself has already pronounced judgement
on the atomic bomb. When James and John (John the beloved) wished to
call down fire from heaven on their enemies, Jesus said:

"You know not of what spirit you are. The Son of Man came not to destroy
souls but to save." He said also, "What you do unto the least of these
my brethren, you do unto me."

****
===
The following text appeared as an introduction to this article when it
was reprinted in the July-August 1975 issue of *The Catholic Worker*.

This August marks the 30th anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima.
On that day a new age of fear was unveiled. Each year the U.S. budget
provides more and more money for arms, B-1 bombers, Trident submarines.
Towns across the country are prospective sites for nuclear power plants.
It is for each of us to resist, as far as we can, this movement of
power, and fear, and destruction. One very immediate way is war tax
resistance, highlighted in this issue of CW.

In September, 1945, Dorothy Day wrote the following position statement
on the atom bomb. We reprint it now as a reminder of our responsibility
to preserve life. Eds. Note.
