%Reflections During Advent-Part Two, The Meaning of Poverty
% Dorothy Day

Ave Maria, December 3, 1966, pp.21-22, 29.

*Summary: Gives examples of false voluntary poverty and refutes the
notion that real poverty doesn't exist. Challenges everyone to a
personal response, not a government one, to poverty and to ask ourselves
"What shall we do?" Gives examples and concludes that all can do
something and that whatever work of mercy we perform we "do it for love
of Jesus, in His humanity, for love of our brother, for love of our
enemy." Points to the scandal of the wealth of the Church and thanks God
for the sacraments and the Word in the Scriptures--our light and our
food. (DDLW \#560).*

THERE IS A STORY of Tolstoi's called "How Much Land Does A Man Need?" It
is the story, as I remember it, of a peasant who left his good land and
home to go to the South, where he had heard there were thousands of
fertile acres for the asking. He made his way to the nomad tribe and
asked for some of their land. The chieftain told him he could claim as
his own the amount of land he could encompass on foot, from sunup to
sundown. When he had rested from his journey he set out running at a
pace he felt he could sustain, for he had great confidence in his own
strength and endurance, and began to stake out his land. But his greed
was greater than his endurance, so his strength began giving out towards
the close of the day. By the time he had run the immense boundaries he
had chosen for himself, he fell dead at the feet of the Cossack
chieftain. He ended in a six-foot grave dug merrily by his scornful
hosts, who sensed that the earth was the Lord's and the fullness
thereof.

We had a man living with us once who claimed that all illness was a
punishment for some fault. When Sunday visitors came in happily with
bunches of poison ivy, picked because of their bright colors or pretty
berries, he labeled the visitors as "acquisitive." It was the fault he
most despised, perhaps because it was the one he was most guilty of
himself. He wanted to be poor, yet he looked upon all things around him
as his own and gathered them to himself.

At the same time, he did not like to work, to be exploited, he called
it, in our present acquisitive, competitive society, so he preferred to
gather furniture and even slightly spoiled food from off the city dump
near the farm, and felt he was exemplifying voluntary poverty.

Another family moving in with us, on one of our Catholic Worker farms,
felt that the beautifying which had made the farmhouse and its
surroundings a charming spot was not consistent with a profession of
poverty. They broke up the rustic benches and fence, built by one of the
men from the Bowery who had stayed with us, and used them for firewood.
The garden surrounding the statue of the Blessed Virgin, where we used
to say the rosary, was trampled down and made into a woodyard filled
with chips and scraps left from the axe which chopped the family wood.
It was the same with the house: the curtains were taken down, the floor
remained bare, there were no pictures--the place became a scene of stark
poverty, and a visiting bishop was appalled at the "poverty." It had
looked quite comfortable before, and one did not think of the crowded
bedrooms or the outhouse down the hill, or the outdoor cistern and well
where water had to be pumped and put on the wood stove in the kitchen to
heat. Not all *these* hardships were evident.

On another farm we owned--a larger place where we could accommodate more
children in summer, more families, more men from off the road--there was
the same lack of plumbing arrangements and the same need to heat the
place with wood fires Even the nearby city helped us out by bringing
logs from trees which had fallen in storms and blocked the highways, to
increase our store of fuel. The place was old and beautiful, and had a
carefully tended flower garden with peonies, iris, forsythia, perennials
and annuals that delighted the eye and kept our chapel furnished with
color and fragrance. Here one of our prosperous visitors looked around
with a censorious eye and commented, "You call this voluntary poverty? I
could not afford a country home like this."

She did not see the three sets of outhouses set back in the trees and
bushes which had to be used winter and summer (the temperature often
dropped to 10 below zero); nor did she see our bare dormitories with
their double-decker beds crowded together, nor the living quarters of a
family over the carriage shed that was heated only by an old stove in
the middle of the barnlike structure, nor the wayfarers' dormitory down
below where men came in from off the road at any hour of the night or
day (and sometimes with a bottle to keep themselves warm!). No doors
were ever locked in that farm by the road.

It is not right to justify oneself, but we tried to point out how
ungrateful we would be to God and to our benefactors if we did not, by
hard work and care, improve what we had received in the way of land and
house. The very men who had come to get help had stayed to give help and
had made the place what it was by constant hard labor.

But the poor, it seems, have no right to beauty, to order. Poverty must
be squalor, filth, ugliness, to be esteemed as poverty. But this is
destitution, and it was usually from such destitution that our family
had come "up in the world." Our visitors did not recognize true
poverty--voluntary poverty now-offered up by these men for the sake of
their fellows . . . a poverty on the part of students and volunteers as
well as men from the Bowery, which meant no money to jingle in the
pocket, no wages, having to ask for tobacco, to wear the clothes which
"came in"and to have no privacy, which is the greatest desire, the
greatest need of all.

Right now on our farm at Tivoli, New York, there****are five hermits in
the woods who have rebuilt old campsites so that, winter and summer,
they can live alone.

During the 33 years that the *Catholic Worker* has been published and the
Houses of Hospitality and farms have grown up around the United States,
there has always been this misunderstanding of poverty.

For a long while, poverty was denied--we just did not have any,
according to popular belief, in our affluent society. Many a time I was
queried by students, "where is poverty? We do not have any around this
prosperous Middle West, for instance." I was asked this question at
Notre Dame, when I spoke there, and to show that there *was* poverty
Julian Pleasants and Norrie Merdzinski, both Notre Dame students.
started a House of Hospitality in the off-bounds section of South
Bend. With the help of Fr. Putz and Fr. Mathis they kept it going
during their student years, to care for unemployed and
unemployable men off the road. The same question was asked me in
Green Bay, Wisconsin, and I could only point out that where there was a
Good Shepherd home for delinquent girls, and an Indian reservation, and
a prison and a public ward in the hospital, there was poverty. You could
always find poverty at the public dump, or in the prison or hospital.
All founders of religious orders and societies searched out poverty.

IT WAS Michael Harrington's book *The Other America,* and Dwight
McDonald's long review and analysis of that book in the *New*
*Yorker,* that made the problem explode in this country, to use an
expression of Abbe Pierre, who himself works with the destitute and
homeless. This book of Mike's, which came as a result of his two-year
stay with us as one of the editors of the *Catholic Worker,* started the
War on Poverty program.

But it is not to discuss solutions proffered by government or city
agencies that I wish to write, though this long introduction was
necessary to clarify the subject. War, and the poverty of peoples which
leads to war, are the great problems of the day and the fundamental
solution is the personal response which each of us makes to the message
of Jesus Christ. It is the solution which works from the bottom up
rather than from the top down, and makes for readiness to join in larger
regional solutions like the organizing of farm workers with Cesar
Chavez, community solutions of Saul Alinsky, village solutions like
Vinoba Bhave's in India, etc.

The wonderful thing is that each one of us can do something about the
problem, each one of us can give his response and can go as far as the
grace of God leads him; and God "ordereth all things sweetly," and there
is no need to be afraid as to where such a response will lead US.

"Ask and you shall receive," Jesus told us, and this asking may be just
that question "What shall we do?" Samuel asked it, St. Paul asked
it--"Lord, what will you have me do?" and they seemed to get direct
answers. Paul was struck blind, literally and to everything else around
him except that one great fact, "whatever ye do to the least of these My
brethren, ye do to Me." If you feed them, clothe them, shelter them,
visit them in prison (or go to prison and so are with them!), serve the
sick, in general perform the works of mercy, you are serving Christ and
alleviating poverty by direct action. If you are persecuting them,
killing them, throwing them in prison, you are doing it to Christ. He
said so.

When the crowd was moved by John the Baptist and asked, "What shall we
do?" he said to them, "He who has two coats give to him who has none."
He also said, "Do injury to no man. Be content with your pay." Or with
no pay at all. If you are voluntarily giving away what you have, giving
your coat, don't expect thanks or the reform of the recipient. We don't
do it for that motive, with the expectation of reward. We must do it for
love of Jesus, in His humanity, for love of our brother, for love of our
enemy.

Charles Peguy in one of his poems, *God Speaks,* tells the story of the
prodigal son and comments, "That's the kind of a Father we have, who
loves even to folly, who forgives seventy times seven, who rushes out to
embrace and feast the prodigal son." This is the kind of love we must
have for the poor. The kind of love which will give away cloak also if
coat is demanded of you.

Nobody is too poor to help another. The stories in the New Testament are
of the widow's mite, of the little boy's loaves and fishes, of the
cloak, of the time given when one is asked to walk a second mile.

Another Russian story which profoundly moved me was *The Honest
Thief,* by Dostoievsky of the hardworking tailor who lived in a corner of
a room, and yet who took in one of the destitute he encountered. The
guest begged and drank and the tailor suspected him of stealing his one
treasure, an old army coat. He spoke to him harshly, but when the thief
ran away, the tailor searched him out and brought him back to his corner
to nurse him in his illness. "Love is the measure by which we shall be
judged." And by not judging we too shall not be judged.

I am thinking of how many leave the Church because of the scandal of the
wealth of the Church, the luxury of the Church which began in the very
earliest day, even perhaps when the Apostles debated on which should be
highest in the kingdom and when the poor began quarreling as to who were
receiving the most from the common table, the Greek Jews or the
Jerusalem Jews. St. Paul commented on the lack of esteem for the poor,
and the kowtowing to the rich, and St. John in the Apocalypse spoke of
the scandal of the churches "where charity had grown cold."

It has always been this way in the Church. On the one hand the struggle
for detachment, to grow in the supernatural life which seems so
unnatural at times, when the vision is dim.

Thank God for the sacraments, the food of life which we**can receive to
strengthen us. Thank God for the Word made flesh and for the Word in the
Scriptures. Thank God for the Gospel which St. Therese pinned close to
her heart, and which the murderer Raskolnikoff listened to from the lips
of a prostitute and took with him into the Siberian prison. The Word is
our light and our understanding, and it is also our food.
