% Fall Appeal - October/November 1975
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October-November 1975, 2.

*Summary: Speaks of loneliness and how community dispels it, even though
quarrels sometimes erupt. Explains where the title of her autobiography,
*The Long Loneliness*, came from. (DDLW \#564).*

Month of the Teresas and Francis, also our Guardian Angels.

Dear fellow workers in Christ,

Once I was visiting John Cort's large family, while his wife was in the
hospital having another baby. "Go easy on that honey there," he said
benignly to the rest of his brood sitting around the breakfast table,
devouring pancakes. "We have another mouth to feed, as of today."

I thought of that as inclement weather increased our population at the
farm, where I am staying this month, and more men had come in "off the
road." These sayings come into our minds as we start worrying about
bills. To pay for Maryhouse's repairs as we go along (no debts there),
we have had to run up bills at St. Joseph's house and the farm--food,
heating, light, taxes, mailing of the paper, and this appeal, with costs
going up all the time. "Always enough for one more. Everyone just takes
a little less." "The things that are impossible with men are possible
with God." (St. Luke 17:26).

One good thing--on the farm there is always work to do. Peter Maurin
said, "There is no unemployment on the land." It means "work, not
wages," however. (That was a slogan of the radicals of the 30's). Our
farm of eighty acres is mostly woods and hillside, but there are ten
level acres for farming, and we do raise more vegetables than we can use
or preserve. Plenty to go to the city for the soup line at harvest time.
There are three goats and a heifer, and a few chickens. Most of the
young people here are vegetarians, though we have meat once a week on
Sunday, and cheese and eggs (occasionally) and plenty of beans for the
other days. If it is not the agronomic university that Pete Maurin
longed for, it is at least a hint of it, a beginning.

Community is a dispeller of loneliness, which so many of the poor and
afflicted suffer from. Stanley Vishnewski, who joined us back in 1934,
regales us with Lithuanian sayings, one of which is, "It is better to
quarrel than be lonely." As in every family, there are occasional
outbreaks of wrath, and of course, in our extended family of 60 or 70 on
the farm, they break out now, and again, as they also do at First Street
in the city. Little samples of class war, race war, flare up in the
men's dormitory, which is often crowded, in bad weather especially. War
between workers and scholars, and black and white, occasionally erupts.
It is good practice to exercise our faith in nonviolent resistance.

"Better to quarrel than be lonely." Stanley's reminder comforts me,
because loneliness is a real suffering, like hunger and cold. The title
of my book, **The Long Loneliness** (part of an autobiography) was a
phrase in a saying of Mary Ward, a nun put into prison in the
seventeenth century in England for following her radical vocation in the
world, instead of in the enclosure. Maisie Ward wrote her biography in a
book, published in 1933, called **The English Way.** "Now begins the
Long Loneliness," Mary Ward wrote. That loneliness is felt by the
prisoner, the patients in mental hospitals, and indeed, by all of us at
one time or another. (Readers have often asked me where the title came
from.)

Somehow, the Catholic Worker houses (and many continue to spring up
around the country) have come to be dispellers of that loneliness. There
is, indeed, a sense of family, and I rejoice in it when I see our 85,000
copies of the paper going out all over the continent--indeed, around the
globe.

To all those who read our appeal, who have kept this work going over the
years, we appeal again and pray God to bless you. You are part of us and
we love you. "Love is an exchange of gifts," some saint wrote--I think
it was St. Ignatius.

Thank you, also, for the grace which gratitude brings to us (grace being
a participation in the divine life). It gives us increased strength and
love to keep going.

Your fellow worker in Christ,

**DOROTHY DAY**
