% On Pilgrimage - January 1976
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1976, 2, 8.

*Summary: Three obituaries: Describes her friendship with Helen Iswolsky
which began in 1941, living at Tivoli farm, ecumenical activities, and
her last illness; Paul Lavalle, a friend and worker with Peter Maurin;
Fr. John Kane, a priest near Tivoli. (DDLW \#566).*

Death has been termed "the last enemy" and every year in the spring we
celebrate Christ's victory over death, and His resurrection from the
dead. "Death is swallowed up in victory." So how can I write sadly of
the death of Helene Iswolsky, who lived with us in Tivoli for eight
years, and of Msgr. John Kane, our pastor at Tivoli, and of Professor
Paul Lavalle, Peter Maurin's old friend, all of whom died this last
month?

Helene I will write of first, since she was my most dear friend ever
since she came from France in 1941. She was a writer, an historian, a
scholar, a translator and teacher. We were most privileged to have her
with us for many years at Tivoli. She kept an apartment in New York, and
two years ago she moved all her extensive library and papers from NYC
and Tivoli to the little Russian center she founded at Cold Spring, N.Y.
There, meetings of **The Third Hour**, an ecumenical group, were held.
We hope to have a brief account of this in a future issue of the **CW**,
if we can persuade one of Helene's Russian associates to write it for
us. Perhaps Dr. Basil Yanovsky, author and physician (like Chekhov) will
write it.

In Helene's great heart there was room for many loves, and she
considered herself a member of the Catholic Worker community as well as
a leader of the **Third Hour** group, which worked for peace between the
Churches: Russian Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican, and,
indeed, all Protestant groups.

Meetings were held at least annually in various churches, also in the
Union Theological Seminary, and our Catholic Workers were much
interested in them all. **Concordances**, one of John XXIII's favorite
emphasis, was basic.

Helene's life would make a great biography. Daughter of a Russian
diplomat, Helene and her family were in Japan, where Alexander Iswolsky
was ambassador, when the Japanese-Russian war broke out. Her father was
the last ambassador to France under the Czar when WWI began, and,
vacationing in Russia that summer of 1914, she caught the last train
which pulled out of Moscow on the way to Berlin where her mother was
visiting friends.

Again they were on the last train from Berlin, arriving in Paris from
Berlin when World War I was declared in 1914. She nursed the wounded in
Paris during that war.

World War II meant her departure from France in 1941, when the Germans
occupied Paris, and she arrived in this country some time later with her
mother and brother, to stay temporarily at Countess Tolstoy's farm for
Russian refugees.

Our friendship began early. Her friends, Jacques Maritain and Emmanuel
Mounier, were the leaders in the personalist and communitarian movement
in Paris which had inspired Peter Maurin to start the CW movement here.

My own love for Russian literature--Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov--drew
me to Helene at once. (She gave a course on Dostoevsky at Vassar College
once, and at our retreat house at Maryfarm, Newburgh.) I used to say
that some day Helene and I would set out together to take that long
train trip from Moscow to Vladivostok.

A Noble Soul
------------

Her small room at Tivoli farm was filled with books and records of
Russian music. Two windows looked out on a tree-covered hillside, and
there was a bird feeder outside one window. Her bed was anything but
comfortable--a narrow cot, one of a donation of sixty or more beds from
the Jesuits when they closed down their house in Hyde Park, N.Y. One
comfortable chair, a table and typewriter, a chest for her clothes, a
closet, and, of course, many ikons made the room crowded but attractive.

She volunteered to keep the guest book, and she helped us entertain the
many visitors who stopped at the farm. It was easy in the summer when
there was all outdoors and the magnificent view of the river and the
shabby but impressive old mansion, which General de Peyster put up more
than 125 years ago. "A decaying mansion" as it is described now, it has
given hospitality to many a student and wanderer over the years we have
spent at Tivoli.

If the weather was inclement, she sat with the visitors in the large,
common room which was shabbier yet, what with broken-down but still
usable furniture, and the many bookcases crammed with books, not to
speak of half-a-dozen children at play. Deane Mowrer was her able
companion in answering the constant inquiries as to what the Catholic
Worker was all about.

Helene cleaned her own room, and often the bathroom on her corridor, and
cleared tables and often waited on guests, epitomizing Peter's
edict--"The scholar must become a worker, and the worker a scholar"--as
a way to overcome class war. I often thought of the phrase "noblesse
oblige" in connection with Helene. She was a noble soul and set an
example to us all in her disciplined life of work, translating, teaching
Russian and writing her memoirs, for which we hope to find a publisher.

A Family Vigil
--------------

Today, as I write this, the snow is falling thickly and heavy gusts of
wind make it come horizontally at times, as though from the North Pole
itself. Helene died Christmas eve at Highland Hospital in Beacon, New
York, not far from Cold Spring where she had rejoiced in her little
Russian Center. Her suffering had been great, but there were no other
people in intensive care so the nurse in charge allowed one or two of us
to take turns sitting by her bedside. We kept constant vigil for some
weeks. She was able only to write two or three word messages, or
inquiries, to us, what with the necessity for a tracheotomy and an
oxygen tank.

Brothers Victor and Patrick were her constant companions (coming from
the little monastery, Our Lady of the Resurrection, on the grounds of
Marist Brother's Hall at Cold Spring). I had the joy of watching with
her daily for hours at a stretch, both of us strengthened by the psalms
and gospels which she motioned for often. When she died, Brother Victor
and Marguerite Harris were with her, one or the other holding her hand.
Helene and Marguerite had traveled by car all the length, if not the
breadth, of the Soviet Union, from Leningrad to the Black Sea, years
before. What great love she had for her country to the very end. Now her
prayers will be overshadowing it, I am sure.

I kept no night watches with her, but hours during the day. Many friends
dropped in to bid her farewell. When Deane Mowrer came from the Tivoli
farm and stood by the bed clasping her hand, Helene opened her eyes,
which had been half closed all morning, and gave her a smile of
unutterable sweetness. She recognized all who came from Tivoli and Cold
Springs.

She was much loved. But from the two young brothers, Victor and Patrick,
she had the most constant and tender affection and care night and day.
She kept reaching up and smoothing Victor's cheek. He had been, for
these last few years, as a son to her.

The cloistered Benedictine nuns from Regina Laudis had permission from
the bishop to leave their cloister to visit Helene, who was a
Benedictine Oblate, associated with them. They brought her the habit she
was laid out in. She received communion daily, a small portion of the
Host, brought to her by the Brothers or by Fr. Lee, of the John XXIII
Center, when he visited her.

Helene died Christmas eve. All Christmas day, in a steady snowfall, she
was visited by her friends and neighbors as she lay in the simple coffin
before the altar in the Brothers' chapel.

The Mass was offered next day by Fr. Gino Piovesana, of the John XXIII
Center at Fordham, in the Byzantine rite. And then, along sleety and
snowy roads, the funeral procession drove north to Tivoli. Helene now
rests in St. Sylvia's Cemetery, in the Catholic Worker plot given by
Monsignor Kane, where twelve small, birchwood crosses indicate the
graves of her fellow Catholic Workers.

Lilac bushes shield the plot from the highway.

Professor Lavalle
-----------------

Professor Paul Lavalle, Peter Maurin's old friend who came to us in
1934, also died this last month at the home of Jacques Travers, a
professor at Brooklyn College. The professor, as we always called him,
and Peter Maurin had had a small Catholic Worker annex, one might call
it, in a store in Harlem during the first two years of the Catholic
Worker, from '33 to '35. They lived there, kept the store open for
discussion, taught French and other languages (Professor Lavalle was a
linguist) and were helped by Ade Bethune and Julia Porcelli, who both
had classes in art and sculpture on Saturdays. The work was much
appreciated by the neighborhood, and during a severe riot in the
mid-thirties the black neighbors guarded the premises from
window-breaking and arson-minded marauders.

Despite this protection of property, the (at first) enthusiastic white
CW subscriber, who had given us free use of the premises, asked us to
vacate because he could not agree with our "pacifist propaganda." I do
not remember whether this was during the Japanese-Chinese war, or the
Italian-Ethiopian war. Oh, the wars we have been through! This episode
was an incident in a class and race war.

Professor Travers is one of our teachers, one might say, giving us many
a talk on Charles Peguy, Emmanuel Mounier and other French writers whom
Peter Maurin always praised for, their "clarification of thought."
(Peter's program began with "round table discussions for the
clarification of thought.") Jacques Travers also exemplifies the second
aspect of Peter's program, "houses of hospitality." Despite a teaching
schedule at Brooklyn College, he has always used his roomy apartment
near Prospect Park as a small house of hospitality.

Arthur Sheehan, who died a few months ago, had done the same with his
little apartment on Mott Street, and Paul Lavalle, "the professor," had
spent some years there. Both Arthur (God rest his soul) and Jacques (may
he be long-lived amongst us) made hospitality "a living word--a way of
life." Professor Lavalle whose Mass was offered by Fr. Pierre Conway,
O.P., was buried in the Conway plot at Calvary Cemetery, where Peter
Maurin was buried in May, 1949.

Monsignor John Kane
-------------------

We are also sad to report the death of Monsignor John Kane, who was
Father Kane when we moved to Tivoli in 1964. He was the first to say
Mass for us in the old schoolhouse chapel and to leave with us the Most
Blessed Sacrament, which it has been our privilege to house for some
decades now. When he expressed his wonder to me at being made a
monsignor, I told him it was because he put up with us, "the offscouring
of all" in more ways than one. I loved Msgr. Kane because he epitomized
to me the great freedom, the diversity, and the liberty in the Church. I
don't know whether he ever read the **CW**. I do know that he subscribed
to and had in his pamphlet rack the **Twin Circle** and **The
Wanderer**, two journals which attacked us often for our positions on
war and peace--and on the State ("War is the health of the State").
Though we were on friendly terms, he frankly said he considered us
subversive.

But when Dorothy Corbin's horse (the loan of which she had temporarily)
ran up the road to the village of Tivoli and ate Msgr. Kane's tulips,
which resulted in an irate call from the rectory, the incident resolved
itself amicably. The monsignor's father had been a blacksmith, and the
encounter resulted in a most friendly conversation.

Another heartwarming incident: a young man we knew, in a state of
depression, rang his doorbell at 2 a.m. and was taken in and comforted.
I love that word "comfort." Literally, from the Latin, it implies being
strong together. "Comfort one another," we are admonished by St. Paul.
May his soul and the souls of all the departed rest in peace.

I was sorry, indeed, not to have been at Monsignor Kane's funeral Mass,
for he had always been very kind to us. But watching at Helene's bedside
was my bounden duty at the time.

Karl Stern
----------

Another dear friend who had spent a number of summer vacations with us
at Tivoli, Dr. Karl Stern, died recently in Montreal. We've had no
letters from our friends in Montreal and can give no details of his
death now. He was a brilliant writer and a good friend to us all.
