% On Pilgrimage - May 1976
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1976, 2, 10.

*Summary: An anniversary recollection in honor of Peter Maurin. Notes
writers who influenced Peter and highlights some of his key ideas. Also
reflects on adversity, beauty, martyrs, and joy. (DDLW \#569).*

Another May Day issue. There have been so many, since that first one in
1933. And Peter Maurin, French peasant, founder, indoctrinator, truly
our inspiration, must be honored on this day.

As I write, I'm sitting in our chapel at the farm at Tivoli. The four
front windows look out on the Hudson river. The last few days have been
sunny and warm and the roads dusty, tracking up our nice clean rooms,
being readied for the great feast of Easter. But in the night there was
a great storm of rain with thunder and lightning. "We needed it," says
John the farmer, who has been with us since 1936.

There are many storms and tumults in our communities, and sometimes the
burdens are heavy which are forced upon us, left on our doorstep, one
might say. Stanley loves to say that community life is a matter of the
martyrs trying to live with the saints.

"We are the offscouring of all," we can say with St. Paul but, living as
we do, I can also say we are "the salt of the earth" and we must guard
continually against losing our "savor."

Yes, our life is full of savor, a pleasant flavor, and a good taste left
in our mouths as crises pass and what seemed insuperable obstacles have
been overcome. (It has been a hard winter, here at the farm!)

But there are 80-acres of beauty around us. There is the Blessed Lord
Himself in our chapel.

Even St. Teresa of Avila sought material, even worldly remedies in times
of crisis. "If the nuns are melancholy, feed them a steak!" And when she
danced and played her castanets at recreation time, and was reproached
for frivolity, she said "We must do something to make life bearable."

So we seek our consolations on the material and mental and spiritual
level. There are two great novels I often turn to in time of stress,
**David Copperfield** and **Kristin Lavransdatter**. I love the way
McCawber found consolation in a sudden feast in the debtor's prison. And
I remember Kristin sitting on a high hill, where she had been gathering
herbs, and suddenly remembering the words from the Mass (I am
paraphrasing) -- "It is right and proper at all times and in all places
to praise and to glorify God" -- and she lifted up her heart.

"Lift up your hearts!"

"We have lifted them up to the Lord."

The book also gives a glowing and beautiful account of the beautiful and
passionate young Kristin in her old age, after she had raised her large
family and survived much sorrow.

It enlightens the mind and enlarges the heart to read of age and the
works one must continue to do -- works which bring both sorrow and joy.

"Unto old age and gray hairs, O Lord, forsake me not."

Our work has been accounted often as folly, yet it has been the "folly
of the Cross!" Peter Maurin, founder of the Catholic Worker, derived his
inspiration, not from the education he received from the Christian
Brothers, but from his contact with French radical thinking. He never
ceased to emphasize the voluntary poverty of St. Francis of Assisi; the
philosophy (and the theology) of work from St. Benedict; the practise of
the works of mercy of St. Vincent de Paul; the intellectual studies of
St. Dominic.

Peter also kept in touch with such thinkers as Jacques Maritain who
visited us in our storefront at 15^th^ Street and who gave us his book
**Freedom in the Modern World**, calling attention especially to the
chapter on the "Use of Pure Means," such as Gandhi's.

Maritain said that our first store front headquarters reminded him of
Charles Peguy's shop in Paris where students and workers gathered. Peguy
was the great influence in the life of Emmanuel Mounier, young student
at the Sorbonne who started the magazine **Esprit**, which began
publication around the same time as ours, and which led Peter Maruun to
translate for us Mounier's "Personalist Manifesto" which was followed by
other articles about revolution, a necessary but nonviolent revolution
which Mounier called "The Personalist and Communitarian Revolution."

Peter is dead now. He died in May 1949. But his work bears fruit still.
Here in the U.S., Chuck Smith in West Virginia amplifies his teachings
on decentralism, land use, dedication to the poor -- truly what Peter
called a new synthesis of Cult, Culture, and Cultivation.

Many little houses of hospitality have sprung up to serve the poor, to
find Christ in the poor, workers themselves trying to "put on Christ,"
"putting off this old man."

(Peter Maurin was as simple and profound as the Gospels, in the way he
taught us.)

Sometimes life is so hard, we foolishly look upon ourselves as martyrs,
because it is almost as though we were literally sharing in the
sufferings of those we serve.

It is good to remember -- to clutch to our aching hearts those sayings
of Fr. Zossima -- "Love in practice is a harsh and dreadful thing
compared to love in dreams." (in **The Brothers Karamazov**).

And that other saying in one of the tales in the **Little Flowers** of
St. Francis -- "This then is perfect joy."

How often that has been used around the Catholic Worker, making us laugh
for the joy at the sudden light and perspective given to our problems.

"We have not yet suffered unto blood." As St Paul said.

The **Nation** has sent me a marked copy of an article (March 6) about
the martyrdom of young mission priests in Honduras, telling how they
(with peasant leaders) were preaching the Personalist and Communitarian
Revolution of Emmanuel Mounier. "Priests have been assassinated, jailed
and exiled," the editorial read. The dynamite inherent in Peter Maurin's
teaching is being set off, as he predicted in the first issue of the
Catholic Worker.

So we beg our readers (91,000 circulation now) to pray for these men in
Central America who have shed their blood. And since we believe in the
Communion of Saints (We are **all** "called to be saints," St. Paul
wrote), let us pray to our fellow workers who have suffered martyrdom,
asking their prayers.

**P.S.** John Cogley, head of the first Chicago house of hospitality and
editor of the Chicago **Catholic Worker** (which was considered by many
to be a better paper than our own), died last month.

Dr. Karl Stern, a most dear and intimate friend of all of us at the
Catholic Worker, died also some months ago. I will try to write more of
them later.

My article for this May issue fell into shape this April morning. By
this time, our readers should know that the **Catholic Worker** editors
have no sense of "time."
