% On Pilgrimage - February 1978
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1978, 2, 5.

*Summary: Series of diary notes from early winter 1978. Recalls visitors
from Australia and bad weather in New York. Discusses her current
reading including re-reading **Anna Karenina**. Discusses suicide with a
priest. Other readings and thoughts revolve around her college friend
Rayna Prohme, the Chinese Revolution, the music of Wagner, and Masses at
St. Joseph's House. (DDLW \#584).*

**Diary Notes - - January and February 1978**

No noise this New Year's Eve - - as there used to be at Mott Street when
neighbors threw all their old trash out the window. Only two revolver
shots heard in the early morning.

\*\*\*

Peter and Eileen Willis visited us from Australia. Had lunch and then
showed us slides of Australia and the aborigines, among whom Peter lived
for many years. (Many of us read the "Boney" books, about an aboriginal
detective. They give us a wonderful feeling of that vast country.)

\*\*\*

Tonight, I went downstairs to the dining room at Maryhouse for the first
time in weeks, and there was a "cabaret," an older woman and a little
child dancing to Strauss waltzes played on the phonograph.

\*\*\*

Woke up feeling so thankful for the parents God gave me. I want to write
"Having a Family," as a follow-up to "Having a Baby," which we reprinted
in the December 1977 **Catholic Worker**. This morning's psalms in
**Praise Him, Prayer Book for Today's Christians**, edited by William
Storey of Notre Dame (a family man and a good friend) are especially
beautiful, and pertinent for one who is ill.

\*\*\*

I have been reading, once more, **Anna Karenina**, the tragedy of
suicide. When a son of a friend of ours took his own life, by putting
his head in a gas oven, I asked the Spanish priest at Our Lady of
Guadalupe Church on 14^th^ St., "Did he die in mortal sin?" I was
remembering Kirilov in **The Possessed** by Dostoyevsky. The priest
said, "There is no time with God, and all the prayers and Masses said
for him after his death will have given him that moment of turning to
God in penitence."

"Worst storm in a decade," the radio says. Woke up to find my floor deep
with snow blown in. My window was only open a few inches. Not a car able
to move on the side streets. Frank got through with the mail.

It is the heaviest snow I can remember, since the first World War in
1917-18, when I walked the streets through the drifts with Mike Gold.

\*\*\*

My room feels like the Russian tenement in Dostoyesvsky's **The Honest
Thief**, where people lived in corners. Langston Hughes and Claude McKay
lived in such "corners" in the Soviet Union. Wally and Rose Carmen
verified this for me. Now I too am living in a corner, what with Stanley
Vishnewski and Tamar, and my granddaughter Katy spending much time with
me. Actually, Katy is on her way back to East Hill School in Vermont,
and Stanley and Tamar are having a vacation from numerous duties at
Tivoli and Perkinsville. It seems so long since I have visited either
place!

\*\*\*

Thinking of Nina Polcyn Moore's and my trip to Russia. Wonder did Nina
keep a diary? We all should, no matter how brief and factual - - and be
careful, in a letter and diary, not to err in charity and write things
that may hurt others.

\*\*\*

Quote from C.S. Lewis' **Letters** "...a dear old man, but the
**inexhaustible loquacity of educated age** drove me back to the City
and the University, to recoup on a Guinness" p. 76.

\*\*\*

Mass tonight - - with Father Peter of the Little Brothers of Charles de
Foucauld. He and Father Lyle Young both offer Mass for us here at
Maryhouse, one on Monday night and one on Wednesday night, and our
prayers are for all **Catholic Worker** readers too. I have such a
feeling of gratitude to Father Lyle, for coming through the slush and
all-but-impassable roads from Putnam Valley N.Y. to say Mass for us.

Our beautiful altar cover was woven by a young Egyptian women, away up
the Nile, and sent to us by one of the Grail women. These women of the
Grail are sent all over the world - - India, South America, etc.

Our chapel is so beautiful. The picture that Dr. Katherine Breydert gave
me hangs in the chapel now, to the right of the alter.

\*\*\*

Stanley brought me **Personal History**, by Vincent Sheehan. One third
of the book ("Revolution") is about Rayna Prohme, my dearest friend in
college. When I was working my way (four hours of manual labor for board
and room in a professor's family) and got ill, she shared her room and
food with me. This chapter about Rayna inspired a woman from the Grail
to go to work among the poorest of the poor in Brazil.

Stanley also brought me a book on China's revolution, **The Morning
Deluge** by Han Suyin. Reading this book recalled my filling in on a
Friday night meeting once with a talk on the life of Mao. I had just
read a book on his life. The word got around, and Chinese and University
people showed up! I had just reviewed the book.

\*\*\*

Found a grand, old book in our library at Maryhouse on Richard Wagner.
(This house of hospitality used to be a music school. I feel its very
walls are soaked in music.) The book has a long analysis of all his
operas. Since Hitler, it has been bad form to love Wagner! At the end of
World War II, at the death of Hitler, Wagner's music was played, with a
sense, I hope, of the tragedy of the life and death of such a man as
Hitler - - a sense of the terrible aspects of sin and cruelty - - a
sense of meaning of the words "a lost soul."

\*\*\*

Our selling arms to Egypt and Israel! Sin and sickness!

\*\*\*

It is good to see the winter months slip by. First glimmer of sun was at
7:40 a.m. on the window panes across the street, and on the pigeons
flying past my window. Reading St. Ignatius of Antioch on submission to
bishops prompted a breakfast discussion on obedience. One of us said she
would move to another diocese (if told to close the Worker). I said I
would obey, thinking of "man's first disobedience." The Lord would
straighten things out, I am sure.

\*\*\*

Quote from C.S. Lewis' **Letters**, "One must take comfort in
remembering that God used an ass to convert the prophet. Perhaps, if we
do our poor best, we shall be allowed a stall near it in the celestial
stables."

\*\*\*

Father Rene Voillaume, founder of the Little Brothers and Sisters of the
Gospel, is in town, and came to concelebrate Monday night Mass with
Father Peter in our chapel. Word got around, and all three rooms,
chapel, library and front office were full. We met and talked afterwards
in the library. In the thirties, Peter Maurin first told us of Father
Voillaume. Now the Little Brothers and Sisters live near us on the Lower
East Side.

\*\*\*

News of Charles Butterworth's death of leukemia came last night.
Shocking news. He was so **good**. It was at Pendle Hill that I first
met Charlie, when I went there to speak. He later came to the Catholic
Worker, and, when I asked him what I had said that brought him to us, he
replied, "When you said you wore the clothes that came in!" I will pray
not only for him and those he left behind, but ask him to pray for Tina,
who also has cancer; and for me, so old and imperfect. I am sure he is
praying for us all.
