% On Pilgrimage - March/April 1978
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March-April 1978, 2, 7.

*Summary: Jottings while convalescing--visitors, books she is reading,
music on the radio. Reflects on vocation and the infludence of Fr. Hugo
on her life. (DDLW \#585).*

Our old friend, Steve Hergenham, who dialogued with Peter Maurin in
Union Square years ago, and who helped us build up our first farm at
Easton, Pennsylvania, used to call us, who get out the **Catholic
Worker**, the pencil-pushers. Meaning that we played around with the
idea of work (a subject on which he used to love to philosophize), and
spent our time at our desks. I suddenly remembered him this morning
(with love and gratitude for all the work he did for us), but also with
a very keen sense that I had not been doing my share of
"pencil-pushing," writing letters, writing my usual column, which, I
hope, will, while I am convalescing, take the place of a letter to all
our friends and readers. It is easier to find solace in books than in
pencil-pushing, and we, or I should say I, excuse myself for thus taking
refuge from the strain of confinement by avoiding my writing duties, and
re-reading favorite books.

\* \* \* \*

Right now, Mary and Kevin Pope and I are reading Tolstoi's
**Resurrection** together, a little each time they come to visit.
Tolstoi gave all the royalties of this book to enable a Russian
sect--the Doukhobors--to emigrate to Canada.

We were in touch with them by correspondence, and I once went to see
them in Canada, when I was on one of my long speaking tours. From
Spokane, Washington, north to Thrums by bus, and then a long hike
through the wilderness to their cabins. They went to jail, rather than
submit their children to compulsory state education.

\* \* \* \*

Virginia Gardner came to visit and brought me another Chekhov book. She
is writing the life of Louise Bryant, who married Jack Reed. He wrote
**Ten Days That Shook the World**, and was in Moscow during the
Revolution.

Also had a visit from Isabella Levitan Yanovsky, with the good news that
Dr. Basil Yanovsky's latest book, **Medicine, Science and Life**,
(Paulist Press), will be published shortly.

\* \* \* \*

Across the street from my window on East Third Street is a sycamore tree
with a few seed balls hanging from it. When I first get up and sit by
the window, the rising sun at the foot of the street has made it a
golden tree, and, during the heavy snows, a tree white and gold --a joy
to survey.

\* \* \* \*

A long coal strike! People have begun opening up chimneys in their
homes. On Mott St. our rear house and also the front house were
cold-water flats, unheated. John Filliger cleaned the chimneys by
putting bricks in a gunny sack and letting it down on a long rope and
banging it back and forth. We always kept warm with wood or coal. Very
cozy. Coal was kept in the basement. The icemen carted it to us in
bushel baskets.

\* \* \* \*

In spite of heavy snow, a good crowd came to the Friday night meeting,
March 3rd. The first meeting I was able to attend since last October.
Bob Gilliam talked on the Church and tradition. Very good.

\* \* \* \*

My desk is still piled high with papers. Haven't the strength or
ambition to clear it off yet. Must do it tomorrow! (Remember Scarlet
O'Hara in "Gone With the Wind.") Cleared one bookcase--discarding or
passing on some books.

\* \* \* \*

Listening to **Eugene Onegin** being broadcast on radio from the
Metropolitan Opera House--delightful, haunting music. This was Helene
Iswolsky's favorite opera as a young girl in Russia, much as my sister's
and mine was**La Boheme**.

\* \* \* \*

Went to the Spanish Mass at our parish church this morning. Constance
Mary Rowe, an English girl who came to work with us when we were on 15th
St. in the thirties, and later joined the Dominican Sisters of Sister
Mary of the Assumption, did the illustrations for the Spanish missalette
we use.

\* \* \* \*

Carol Berrigan called from Syracuse, New York. Wonderful work going on
there at Unity Kitchen and Unity Acres. Last month, Anne Marie Fraser
and Dan Mauk visited the Rochester, New York, Catholic Worker house,
which Danny O'Shea has been running for almost a year now. Danny, a
seminarian from Providence, Rhode Island diocese, who was with us at St.
Joseph's House, is now a deacon. He took Anne Marie and Dan to visit Our
Lady of Genesee in Piffard, New York. The monks built their own chapel
there with the stones they "harvested" from the soil. We must pray for
their new foundation in Brazil.

\* \* \* \*

Talked on the phone with Tina de Aragon, who is my sister-in-law's
sister. She has been ill and I ask prayers for her. Tina carved the
beautiful statue of the Blessed Mother, which is in our chapel at
Maryfarm, Tivoli, New York, out of the hardest wood in the world--lignum
vitae. We owe a great debt of gratitude to her.

\* \* \* \*

As she brought me my oatmeal yesterday morning, Mary O'Connor announced
that she and Paul Loh will be married in June! And last night, Anne
Marie Fraser came by and announced that she and Steve Kaune plan to be
married in July! This is very happy news. They are beautiful people.

\* \* \* \*

Each of us has a different vocation. We have a wonderful group of young
workers, but few there are who think of it as a life work. As Stanley
Vishnewski says, "Some come, saying they have found their life work, and
remain a few months (or days). Others, more tentative, speak of a visit,
and stay."

But we have become a large family, indeed. And all things are possible
with God. We must "Abandon ourselves to Divine Providence," which was
the first religious book, together with Teresa of Avila's autobiography,
which I read in the early years after my conversion. They are still good
reading.

\* \* \* \*

I must not forget to mention the influence of Fr. John J. Hugo in my
life. He gave retreats in the early days of the Worker that so aroused
the ire of other priests that his books, his "doctrine" were put "on the
shelf," as it were, for many years. He was young and preached so
thrillingly severe a doctrine of "putting off" the world and "putting
on" Christ, and upheld the pacifist cause so ardently, that for years he
was shifted from parish to parish in his diocese.

A truly consistent person, he kept his calm over the years, and is now
giving Scriptural Retreats again, this summer. (See our notice in this
issue of the paper.)
