% On Pilgrimage - June 1978
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1978, 2.

*Summary: Admires the witness and energy of young Catholic Workers.
Mentions visitors, books she is reading, renewed anti-Semitism, and her
love of the Psalms. (DDLW \#589).*

I rejoice to see the young people thinking of "the works of mercy" as a
truly revolutionary, but nonviolent program. The spiritual and corporal
certainly go together, and often involve suffering. To oppose nuclear
buildup has led to the imprisonment this last month of two of our
workers, Robert Ellsberg and Brian Terrell, in Rocky Flats,
Colorado--and solitary confinement is suffering indeed, and, added to
that, a hunger strike is certainly dying to self.

Meanwhile, I am confined in another way by weakness and age, but can
truly pray with fervor for those on active duty, and sternly suppress my
envy at the activities of our young and valiant workers.

At the Mobilization for Survival demonstration at the United Nations on
Saturday, May 27th, many people from both houses and the farm took part.
Pat and Kathleen Jordan and their two children, and Micki Timmins and
Mike DeGregory and their two children came in for it. The Sojourners
Community from Washington D.C. too. They all came back to Maryhouse for
dinner.

A sit-in at the U.S. Mission to the United Nations will take place on
June 12, and a new Seabrook, N.H. action on June 24th. Some of my
grandchildren will be in on that.

\* \* \*
---

45th Anniversary dinner on May 1st, at Maryhouse! The party was a great
success. All the dining room tables were set up in the auditorium. Folks
from St. Joseph House, many from the farm at Tivoli, and old friends
came. I received an anniversary gift from Isidore Fazio--he made a
stained-glass Cross, which is hanging in my window. And on May 8th,
another party, for Peter Maurin's birthday.

It is so good to be eating downstairs again, regularly, at night. Good,
too, to have men and women, so young and strong, helping us. They hold
each other up when tense moments occur. Women fight as well as men!

The dining room at Maryhouse is pleasant as a sitting room too, with its
red, calico curtains, women sewing, or playing solitaire, and one woman
reading Scripture.

Fathers Robert Hovda and Henry Fehrens, old friends, called on us. I
took them for a tour of the house, and our attempt at a garden, and told
them of our need of Bibles. Old Testament also is "The Word." Jesus,
"The Word made flesh," "The Word, the Truth, and the Life" come among
us. "Lord, I believe, help Thou my unbelief."

\* \* \*
---

Had a lovely visit from Jean Kennedy and her husband, Bob, bringing
clothes, and flowers, enough for our chapel. They are among our earliest
supporters, and one of their sons, now a priest, helped paint rooms in
our hospitality house on Mott Street.

Sister Peter Claver, who now has a house of prayer in Rome, Georgia,
brought me the manuscript of Fr. John Hugo's latest book, **Your Ways
Are Not My Ways**. Practically all of the Catholic Worker staff used to
make Fr. Hugo's retreat once a year. He is giving them again this summer
in Pittsburgh.

\* \* \*
---

May 5th was Karl Marx's birthday. Eileen Egan and I visited his grave
when we were in London years ago.

\* \* \*
---

Labor leaders receive $100,000 yearly, and more, but less than
corporation heads, according to **Business Week**! (I listen to the
radio while writing in my diary. A bad plane accident in Pensacola,
Florida. I still prefer buses for long distance travel (or ships). The
Moores (Nina Polcyn), of Sauk Centre, Minn., are in Spain. She and her
husband offered to take me with them!

\* \* \*
---

News of renewed anti-Semitism in the U.S. and in Europe! This morning,
thinking of this, I remembered how Nina Polcyn and I picketed the S.S.
Bremen in the late Thirties, and the Communist Party member tearing the
swastika flag down, and his being shot in the leg by the ship's guard.
And, how we fled from the police who were dispersing the demonstration.

\* \* \*
---

Dr. Karl Stern of Montreal, now deceased, had a brother who lived on a
Kibbutz. The three of us went for a walk on the Lower East Side on a
Friday night, and, every time we passed a synagogue, Dr. Stern's brother
deplored his absence of headgear so he could join the worship. Dr. Karl
was a convert, but this did not lessen, in any way, the devotion of the
brothers for each other.

\* \* \*
---

Went to the Friday night meeting--Fr. George Anderson, S.J., prison
chaplain, spoke. I recall prisons I have been in. Ugly, in some ways,
but rewarding in others. A deepening understanding of the poor.

Frank, with the help of Lee LeCuyer, has finished making out the annual
report on our finances. He says we gave out more than we took in this
past year. Our voluntary poverty enriches us daily. In friendships, too.

Lee has moved to the farm, to share the work and responsibilities there
with Joan Welch, Miriam Carroll, Stanley Vishnewski, and Deane Mowrer,
who helps so much, seeing our countless visitors.

\* \* \*
---

Mary and Kevin Pope and I have finished reading **Resurrection**by
Tolstoi--now we want to read **The Island** by Chekhov together, but I
have misplaced it.

Smell of furnace or water heater fumes in my room! Fumes from cars are
killing the lower branches of the tree across the street.

When the young complain, I remember my mother used to say, "But you have
youth!" I still complain, and, as I write this, I remember Hans
Tunnesen, our seaman cook at the farm, who used to say, after his game
of cards after supper, and wanting to go to bed--"Shall we go to the
chapel and 'complain'," meaning "say Compline," our evening prayer.

One of my favorite readings, morning and evening, is the **Psalms**, and
next to that, C.S. Lewis' **Reflections on the Psalms**.
