% On Pilgrimage - March/April 1980
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March-April 1980, 2.

*Summary: Notes from her diary about operas, Friday night speakers,
visitors, phone calls, and friends. (DDLW \#604).*

##****

Diary notes, which never turned into an article.

Thurs, 2/14--Wonderful stories turned in for the February issue of **The
Catholic Worker**-Todd Gauchat's letter and Meg Brodhead's Maryhouse
column.

##****

Fri, 2/15--I'm sorry to miss our Friday night meetings, especially this
one. Peter Steinfels, executive editor of **Commonweal** is our speaker.
The **Commonweal**printed my first articles as a Catholic convert the
Hunger Marches in the Thirties. This led to Peter Maurin's arrival, and
the Catholic Worker. George Shuster, **Commonweal** editor at that time,
sent him to me. Deane Mowrer tapes our Friday night talks, so I can hear
them later, when I cannot get down to our auditorium. Dr. Marion Moses
came to supper with me in my room.

##****

Sat, 2/16--Listened to Richard Strauss' **Elektra**on the radio, live
from the Metropolitan Opera House this afternoon. Strauss also composed
**Salome**and Der Rosenkavalier.

Sun, 2/17--Janet Ward Hirschfield visited early and brought me my
breakfast. She is pregnant, and wants to read my "Having a Baby."

WBAI Radio broadcasted the entire Wagner Ring all day. I listened to a
lot of it and read the stories in an opera book.

My sister Della called from Victoria, British Columbia. So good to hear
her voice. I must send her the packet of Stanley's photos I promised.

##****

Thurs, 2/21--Press Day for the February issue of **The Catholic
Worker.**Our timing is fantastic!

My grand-daughter, Kate Hennessy, is here for a few days from the East
Hill School in Chester, Vermont, where she is teaching the flute. Maggie
Corbin is there also.

Tom Cornell, one of our former editors, dropped in. He is teaching at
Mercy College.

##****

Fri, 2/22--Letter from Margaret Allsworth, Washington, Mississippi.
Memories of my visits there during a time of terror for any sympathizers
with Blacks. She sent a check; and sympathy on Stanley's death. She
visited us at Peter Maurin's Farm, Staten Island, years ago. Two black
girls were then with us from the deep South-Classie May was the name of
one of them. A badly crippled boy and his companion used to come and
visit daily. They all had such a good time together. I remember it as a
time of much laughter.

##****

Sat, 2/23--Heard **Cavalleria Rusticana**and **Pagliacci** live from the
Met on the radio.

Rita Corbin and her two youngest children are in town from Poughkeepsie
for a few days.

##****

Sun, 2/24--Cornelia Holbert telephoned from Kinderhook, N.Y. Said she
had searched for **The Arundel Motto** and found a copy and would send
it.

Tonight, watched **War and Peace** on television and later a documentary
on charles Darwin, both of them one of a series. Katy, my
grand-daughter, sat and knitted and listened and watched at the same
time.

##****

Mon, 2/25--"Jesus, Joy of Man's Desiring"--Bach--lovely title for lovely
music.

Kassie Temple brought me breakfast on her way to St. Vincent's Hospital
with one of our "ladies" (as Deane and I were termed when we were in
jail years ago, when we refused to take shelter in mock air raid
drills). Kassie borrowed a detective story to read while waiting at the
hospital.

Watched Leonard Bernstein conducting **Romeo and Juliet**on
TV--beautiful music, though not as beautiful as Wagner's **Tristan**and
Isolde.

Tues, 2/26--Margaret Lloyd called--is up from the Carolinas briefly. She
and I are collectors of stones. Anne Fraser Kaune came in this a.m. for
breakfast. Katy came for supper. Tom Sullivan,one of our former managing
editors, telephoned.

Reading Josephine Tey's **To Love and Be Wise.** She is as good a
detective story writer as Dorothy Sayers.

I cannot eat a heavy supper, so I save my plate for lunch the next
day--instead of the eternal soup. Isn't there a song about "beautiful
soup" in Alice in Wonderland?

Wed, 2/28--Fr. Geoff Gneuhs said Mass tonight. Many in the house are
down with the flu this winter.

##****

Fri, 2/29--Eileen Egan****is our speaker tonight-on Mother Teresa of
Calcutta.

##****

Sat, 3/1--Dorothy Gauchat called from Avon, Ohio--she is going into the
hospital tomorrow--having an operation on her spine. Pray for her and
for her marvelous works with crippled children.

##****

Sun, 3/2--Nina Polcyn Moore called from Sauk Centre, Minnesota. She is
worried about her stepsons if the draft is reinstituted.

Doug Finch, a friend of Kassie Temple, gave a piano concert in our
auditorium this afternoon. I felt too weak to go down. Listened to
Strauss' **Salome**on the radio instead.

A child, kidnapped seven years ago in California, has been found, which
makes me think of Mary Augustine, whose grandson disappeared several
years ago. She was working with us here in New York when the news came
from her daughter.

##****

Tues, 3/4--Telephoned my daughter, Tamar, on her birthday.

##****

Thurs, 3/6--Wonderful music on radio--Brahms, Wagner, Bruckner.

##****

Sun, 3/9--A dozen people from the Catholic Worker and two Little
Brothers of the Gospel left in our van yesterday for Washington, D.C. to
demonstrate at the Pentagon. This morning they had a Mass outside the
Pentagon. A street Mass! I wonder what Charles De Foucald, who founded
th Little Brothers order, would have said? I am sure he was blessing the
enterprise.

As to the story of the return of the Kidnapped child--he is Mary
Augustine's grandchild! Mary's brother, Hugh Madden, had come to New
York to picker with Ammon Hennacy. Formerly a ship's captain on the West
Coast, he had run our House of Hospitality in Oakland, California. After
his death, Mary came to visit us and was at Tivoli when we got news of
her grandson's disappearance. She later visited and helped repair
Maryhouse, loosening the paint-encrusted shutters. I saw her and her
family again when I was picketing with the grape strikers in California.
Truth is stranger than fiction.

##****

Fri, 3/14--Three things happening at once tonight: 1. Our Friday night
meeting--Eileen Egan's cousin, Fr. Jack Egan is our speaker; 2. The
return of Deane and the others from the Washington demonstration; 3. Dr.
Marion Moses here for supper, with news of her research work.

##****

Sat, 3/15--Bill Callahan died in Latrobe. He was our first managing
editor, in October 1936. Bill and I went to Washington, D.C., to protest
the draft before World War II. After Stanley Vishnewski's death, Tom
Sullivan sent me a list of the many Catholic Workers who have died over
the years. There will be quite a throng to welcome Bill into heaven.
