% Coal Miners--Their Strike Not John L. Lewis's
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1950, 1, 2.

*Summary: Describes the conditions of striking coal miners who defy both
the employers and their own unions. Affirms the need for human dignity
in daily work that neither the communists nor the unions nor the
employers are providing. Decries the dishonest expropriation of natuual
resources. Begs assistance for the striking miners. (DDLW \#608).*

Three hundred and forty thousand miners, in the soft coal fields in
Illinois, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Ohio, Colorado and Wyoming are at
present on strike, and have been since Feb. 6. Ordered back to work on
Feb. 11, both by court order and John L. Lewis obeying that court order,
the miners refused. Whereupon the union, not Lewis, is cited for
contempt. In 1946 in a similar situation the miners were fined \$700,000
and Lewis \$10,000. Two years later in similar situation, the court
doubled these fines for refusing to obey a back to work order.

Talking to employers, operators, owners of steels mills, one hears great
tales of high salaries, short hours, improved conditions of work. We all
have seen the ads,, "which one of these beautiful little houses do the
miners live in?" (in *Time* magazine) indicating that the miners live as
good as anybody else.

Talking to folks who live near the miners (because they live a life
apart, an esprit de corps among them, a pride in their work; also
because they live in patches, though they hate the term) I have heard
how on occasion they come down from the hills, from their settlements,
and fling their money away riotously in the taverns on drink and slot
machines. (Did you know that in these same taverns there are also slot
machines selling contraceptives, like chewing gum or chocolate? It
started with the war. But this perversion of the worker started long
before in our industrial capitalist system. In the old days, when
organizers came among the men the operatives put on a big show and party
at the local saloons with burlesque and free drink, to lure the men from
union meetings.)

What do the men care about fines? What is \$700,000 or \$1,400,000 in
these days when the government is tossing about billions. The class war
is on. It has always been on, and until the men get what they want money
doesn't mean a thing. That is the way they act. What they want is
ownership, even if it begins only with a share in the management, which
the Popes have called for. That is probably why F.B.I. agents, as well
as professional strike breakers as well as armed deputies are haunting
the pits. It's all a Communist plot!

John Brophy, once vice-president of the Mine Workers and since then one
of the top officials of the CIO, told me how Lewis' thugs had him beaten
up in his hotel room during one of the conventions because he was
advocating nationalization of the mines. John Brophy is a Catholic, but
he believed there could be such a thing as Christian socialism.

Now Lewis is going around beaming, waiting for President Truman to issue
an order nationalizing the mines. It doesn't mean a thing as far as
profits are concerned. It just means that the miners still respect their
government (but do not respect the mine owners) and have been willing to
cooperate with it. But they have also seen what it means by now and are
hedging. This time, if the state takes over as an emergency measure,
they want the mines to run without profit to the operators, but for the
common good.

The operators on the other hand, the bosses, the owners, are terrified
because in each case when the government took over, it was easy to see
how utterly useless the "managers" as they might profess to call
themselves, were. No one can run the mines but the miners. And amongst
them there are men that can "manage" them. The goods of the earth belong
to God, who made them for man's use, not to be expropriated by the
dishonest few. The whole history of capital in this country is the story
of the trickery and connivary by which the smart few got possession of
our national resources, the railroads, the forests, the mines, and so
on, down through gas and oil, in so many cases ousting the legal owners
of the land wherein these resources were found.

*The Robber Barons, Factories in the Fields* -- these books tell the
story.

According to the teachings of the Church, "the rich must come by their
riches honestly; and this applies alike to inheritance and current
earnings. An heir to ill-gotten goods is bound by restitution as far as
may be." -- Walter Shewring -- The Rich and the Poor in Christian
Tradition.

No matter the gains made by the union, the coal strikers are *the poor*
at this present writing and need help. Either their funds are tied up by
Lewis, by the need to pay enormous law fees or by fines. Anyway, they
are most of them on relief, and with the threat hanging over them of the
withdrawing of that. Relief in most states is slim picking. So any of
our readers who wish to help them . . . we beg their aid for them. They
need money and food.

Send aid to the United Mine Workers' Bldg., Washington, D.C.
