% On Pilgrimage - March 1951
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1951, 1, 6.

*Summary: Describes the bucolic scene at Peter Maurin Farm as she begins
to write her column. Relishes their joy and reminds us of the sorrowful
aspects of life, for example, drunkenness. Talks of how hard it is to
serve the poor and keep at the mundane drudgery--"the mystery of sin and
suffering." (DDLW \#619).*

On Pilgrimage
-------------

**February 26 –** Although I spend more than half my time at Chrystie
street, I like to write my **On Pilgrimage** column from the country in
order to bring a breath of the soil to our readers. Today, Monday
morning, I am sitting in my room at the Peter Maurin Farm, on
Bloomingdale Road, Pleasant Plains, Staten Island, and looking out the
window as I write. The east window looks over fields, sloping down to
the woods and the little brook which rises in a swamp a mile away and
flows through our land, marking the eastern boundary, down to Lemon
creek and into Raritan bay. The woods are brown and the fields are
golden in the sun, and the trees in the woodlot, stand out black and
beautiful against the rising yellow field beyond. There is a blacksmith
shop and a shed there, both very much in need of repair but I can
foresee that they are going to become hermitages before the summer
begins.

I wish Joe Cueller, who is living in a hermitage beside a brook out in
New Mexico, would come back and take over one of ours. He could live in
silence and manual labor, and he could relieve his solitude by going
into the city for the apostolate of the streets, selling the paper. He
was always a good example to us, was Joe. When he writes me he calls me
Melania after the friend of St. Jerome.

Beauty
------

The window to my right (I have my back to the sunny window) looks
north, and there is more subtle gradations of color in the scene because
the sun is not in my eyes. There is a pearly haze in the air, cherry
trees are black and beech trees are pearly grey, and there is a pinkness
about the ends of all the branches. The buds are swelling on some of the
bushes, and the branches we bring in the house burst into leaf.
Starlings cluster in the branches like leaves. There is no green yet,
but only blue, lavender, pearl grey, yellow and brown, a delicate
combination. There is a promise of warmth later in the day when the sun
is stronger.

It is early morning. Irene and Isidore have gone for a two mile walk to
the organic farm of Mr. Gericke to ask questions about pruning and to
buy some black molasses for bread.

Hans is making a flight of steps into the attic over the men's side of
the house, which will free the attic on the woman's side for a
dormitory. I can see Marge and her four children rampaging around up
there come a warmer week-end. The house is solid, and if Marge feels
like teaching Johannah the polka – she used to dance it down the hills
at Easton with Leonard Austin – I am sure the house can stand it.

Work
----

Down stairs the baby is crying while Rita gets her breakfast ready,
mashed prunes, baby cereal and milk, all mixed together deliciously.
Little Rachel is three months old now and eats with avidity. The
finishing job on the bakery, the second coat of paint, is to be done
today and soon the first batch of bread for the ambassadors of Christ
(the breadline) will be turned out and brought into the city. Albert,
who is going to help Ruth bake, is down at the beach in search of clams
and mussels to eat and seaweed for compost. He walks the two miles to
the beach and returns with a heavy sack on his back.

These days when we go down the road through the woods for Mass at St.
Louis Academy, the moon is still bright, but day is not far off. The sun
is well up at seven a.m. and at six in the evening it is not really dark
yet, but twilight. The days are getting longer. It is warmer by the sea
than it is inland, so we expect to be planting salads and peas shortly.
Our readers, suburban and country are going to rush for their seed
catalogues, if they are not already at them.

To talk about these things, to write about them, to think about them,
and then to do them – this is to be "on the side of life," as my
son-in-law, Dave Hennessy would say.

It is a joyful thing we have a baby on Staten Island. "We must always
have a baby with us," Rita says. "When this one goes, we must find
another mother and child." It makes us live pretty much in the joyful
mysteries, to be around children.

Oh yes, I well know we must go through the sorrowful to get to the
glorious – that fact is dinned into our ears quite enough, and we have
the realization of that on every side of us too. There are always the
sick and suffering ones with us, and some times it seems as though half
the household is sick in body or mind, possessed, or just plain drunk.
To keep one's charity and peace of mind under these conditions which are
pretty constantly with us, is to be living the entire rosary at once.
With much work from morning to night, even though it is only letters and
seeing visitors, there begins to be a timeless quality about our lives.
We go through a gamut of rejoicing and grieving every day.

I do not mind speaking openly of this drunkenness, since it is a problem
which afflicts many a family. Last week we had four women who were
drinking (not together, each was going her own way). One would get
straightened out and then relapse again. One of the men, who helps much
when he is sober, was also drinking. When we said the rosary at noon, as
we do each day for peace, he said it louder than any one, and emphasized
his consciousness of himself - "pray for us sinners, NOW and at the hour
of our death." Or it was, "pray for us SINNERS, now and at the hour of
our death."

Community
---------

Saturday afternoon I left the place and with this parting meditation
to a few of the others. "Here we are supposed to be servants of the
poor, of each other. We take pride in such terms, long used by religious
orders. We don't want to be called social workers. Although we have an
unjust and prideful scorn of them too often, just because Peter Maurin
criticized them as trying to make people adapt themselves to their
surroundings instead of trying to change the social order – 'to make the
kind of society where it is easier for people to be good.' If we are
truly servants then we will keep at the job in humility, putting our
'mistress' to bed, giving them black coffee, aspirin, cold compresses on
the head, and urging them gently and respectfully to get back to bed to
sleep it off.

"What a wonderful thought!" said Jack English enthusiastically as he
wandered through the room where I was talking. "How tremendous are the
implications of Christianity, of the sermon on the mount. It stuns you!"

"But I wouldn't work for such masters and mistresses," said another with
plain commonsense. "I'd get another job."

"But suppose you had a family to support, and could get no other job."


The Little Way
--------------

At any rate, it seems to be our job, very often, and not at all the kind
of job, we picked out for ourselves. We all wanted to do important
revolutionary work in the lay apostolate and here we find ourselves
washing clothes, spreading compost, taking care of babies, putting
drunks to bed, making coffee and mopping floors. And still we'd rather
do that than listen interminably to the stories of the poor, the
complaints, the tragedies, the truth and the lies, the recriminations,
the self complacencies of the streams of people coming in and out all
day and every day, those who come to get help, and those who come
because they want to be "in the apostolate" because they want to give
it. It has gotten so that one is ashamed to be on the "giving side," to
be in the position of dispensing. One needs to constantly remind oneself
that we are truly on the receiving side and have received from others
what they wish us to dispense with love. We are not only the servants of
the poor but servants of those more comfortably off.

Yes, there are picket lines, literature to be distributed and I wish we
had more to do it and more who realized the importance of doing it.
There are meetings to address, and articles to write, and a book to
finish and it is easy to lose oneself in the small demands of others,
and not do one's proper work which one is obliged to.

Oh these masters and mistresses of ours know full well the implication
of the Gospel. Bill Evans, God rest his soul, used to follow me down the
street calling, "Remember, Dorothy, seventy times seven." And Nellie
will quote, "Let him who is without sin cast the first stone," and as
for being importunate – we are always being put into the position of
being the unjust judge or reluctant friend! Tom Sullivan is in the worst
position because he sleeps on the street floor and some erring brethren
are always knocking on his window to be let in.

Lent
----

It may seem that I am speaking lightly of these things, but these are
sorrowful mysteries indeed, the mystery of sin and suffering, and how we
are all members one of another, and drag each other down, or pull each
other up.

It is still Lent and will be until we start getting our April issue
ready for press. We are using the Lenten missal which Ade Bethune
illustrated some years ago. Never are there more inspiring lessons than
we read every day in the Old Testament and the New, the story of the
widow's cruse, the story of the Naaman the leper, the healings of the
New Testament. All these stories are as good for today as there were
then, and these things are still happening on every side, and we can
expect them to happen.

"Hope," writes St. Thomas, "is that elevation of the soul, by which it
confidently pursues a sublime and arduous good, despising and overcoming
all the obstacles encountered." The sublime and arduous good we are
pursuing is to grow in the love of God and of our brothers. "Do this and
ye shall live," said the Lord.
