% Untitled review of 
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1952, 4.

*Summary: Lukewarm review of a book on Christian unity. Defends the
author's critique of Catholics but wishes he was better versed on
ecumenical efforts, including ones she is involved in. (DDLW \#632).*



*A Catholic Speaks His Mind on America's Religious Conflict*, by Thomas
Sugure, Harper & Bros., N.Y. $1.00

When I came back to the Peter Maurin Farm at Pleasant Plains, after
speaking on the same platform with secularist liberals and Communists at
carnegie Hall a few weeks ago, I went to our little chapel which is
quiet and bright and warm with the presence of all good, of love
unutterable. I felt suddenly happy.

Life was a succession of struggles, a grim battle often, a venturing out
on a dangerous front, and then a quiet retreat to gather one's forces in
silence, in suffering and prayer. Probably what I had done would be
censured by many. And indeed if I had made a mistake, God would have to
take care of it.

I had been thinking of the Holy Father's February 11^th^ message: "We
must do everything, everything, for peace." "Of what value would be
disputations on justice, on charity on peace, if the will were already
resolved, if the heart were determined to remain in icy solitude and if
none were to dare to be the first to break through the barrier of
dividing hate to hasten to offer a sincere embrace?

What gestures we must make these days! Yes, God would have to repair our
mistakes. He would have to take care of it. "Underneath are the
everlasting arms."

Thomas Sugrue felt that way when he finished his book*A Catholic Speaks
His Mind on America's Religious Conflict*. Catholic editors and writers
feel affronted that a good part of the book appeared in the Christian
Herald, a Protestant publication. They felt that a Blanshard was quite
articulate enough without a "cradle Catholic" joining in the criticism
of the Church. It seems to me it was that more than anything else that
caused the outcry.

But the book must be judged on its intention--and that is the intense
desire of the author to reach out to others, to find some basis for
unity. There is an intense hunger in the heart of Thomas Sugrue for
unity and this desire is and expression of the love he has for the great
body of Protestant Christians in this country. I have this yearning
toward Communists, and I recognize this spirit when I see it in others.

What if the does criticize Catholics? Aren't we all taught in the
spiritual life to take criticism, deserved, and undeserved? "This then
is the perfect joy!" Saint Francis said. And Saint Peter said the same.
We are to take it and humbly say we deserve far more. Indeed when it
comes down to it, Sugure's criticism is bitter and strong and too
concentrated, too much along one line. But we could all add our bit to
it.

I could complain of the attitude of churchmen or rather the lack of any
stand taken against great social sins. We have had a Father Dunne come
out in the Short case (remember the story in the Commonweal?) we have
had individuals weeping with those who weep, crying out for justice, but
where is the public excoriation of sin, the denouncing of lynchings,
legal lynchings and those by mobs, the burning of Negroes and their
homes, the looting of the poor by corrupt civil servants and the
defrauding of the laborer of his hire-sins crying to heaven for
vengeance?

There are too many Communion breakfasts (Sugrue mentions them where
politicians and exploiters of labor sit side by side, cheek by jowl with
the clergy, and we could all of us, name names and places. No, the
Church is expected these days to be bulwarks of the status quo, and is
honored as such, and enjoys a false sense of peace as such.

"The Church is as uneasy in a concordat as she is in the Catacombs," it
has been said. The trouble with Sugrue's book is that it does not go far
enough. As a convert with a Protestant background I was always conscious
of the iron curtain between Catholics and Protestants. Sugrue felt it
most keenly in New England. He knew the Catholics were looked down upon
by Protestants, who were in turn scorned by the Catholics. He didn't
like the scorn he saw. When he wondered why Catholics were not liked, he
looked around and found plenty of reason why, in the political
Catholicism of our great cities, in the attempt, at whatever cost to be
as good as the next one. He beats his breast over the political and
business practices of well known Catholics. Mea Culpa! Mea Culpa!

How to get together with our Protestant brothers? It has been said many
times that there can be no peace while Christians are so hostile, so
divided. Mr. Sugrue does not seem to know much about the ecumenical
movements in Europe and this country. He is familiar with Karl Adam's
book **One and Holy**, and quotes from it. He comes to many of the same
conclusions.

But he does not know Father Danielou and his **Salvation of the
Nations**and **Advent,**and I hope he gets them and enjoys them. I hope
too, that he gets acquainted with Father Yves de Montcheuil, the Jesuit,
and Yves Congar, the Dominican, **Men of Action,**by the first named,
has recently been published by Fides Press and "Attitudes toward Reforms
in the Church part of a book by the latter, has appeared in the fourth
number of Cross Currents.

Many of the things Sugrue has said have been said before. Father de
Menasce, French Dominican, spoke at the Third Hour meeting last month
(the Third Hour is another ecumenical group not known to Sugure) and
said through the mystics of every faith, the Sufi of the Mohammedans,
the guru of the Buddhists, the prophet of Israel and the saints of the
Protestant and Catholic and Eastern Churches we would meet on a common
ground in a stretching out of the soul to God, as the author of **The
Cloud of Unknowing** said, "Look that nothing live in the waking mind
but a naked intent stretching unto God." "Press upon Him with longing
love.

We can meet too, he says, on the ground of social justice, the common
good. Does he know of Saul Alinsky's back of the yards movement in
Chicago where Bishop Sheil too has tried to find common ground with
non-Catholics?

This is far from saying "One religion is as good as another." Thomas
Sugrue himself does not believe this. He writes of his discovery of St.
John of the Cross and Teresa of Avila, and others. "They are the heart
of Catholicism; they are its mystical core; after I had found them and
studied them I would not have left the Church under any persuasion." And
later, "I consider when I think of Simone Weil, that I was fortunate to
be born inside the gate, and that I was lucky in having the sense to
take myself inward toward the center in my flight from the noise of the
markets, instead of fleeing outward through the gate."

Mr. Sugrue makes it plain that he is a practicing Catholic, and when he
speaks as he did recently at the New School for Social Responsibility
and at the Community Church, he has appeared to voice this longing of
this heart to reach his brothers. My friend Sally Schiltiuys heard him
at the New School and said she was stirred by his message of love and
only reinforced her faith. Tom Sullivan and Charlie McCormick heard him
at the Community Church and said that in the question period, when
questions were aired and misunderstandings were brought out into the
open. Sugrue could only be considered in the light of defender of the
faith.

Reaching as he does, through books and lectures, so many who know little
of our faith, we are hoping that he will deepen and enrich his own
knowledge of it to further his missionary work with a more positive
approach to unity.
