% The Conversion of Ammon Hennacy
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1953, 2.

*Summary: An account of the conversion of Ammon Hennacy. Profiles his
anarchist and pacifist beliefs, sensitivity to oppression, effect on
people, and journey to Baptism. (DDLW \#642).*

What to say about such a conversion as Ammon's, and how happy it made
us! We have known him 16 years, since the early days of the Milwaukee
House of Hospitality. He sold the Catholic Worker and distributed it all
these years, and loved it because Peter was a "one-man revolutionist"
like himself and because our "personalist and communitarian revolution"
was his also. Many among us will call themselves personalists,
libertarian, pluralist, regionalist, but he will always call himself
"anarchist." He is a pacifist and conscientious objector to all war and
to all coercion. His picketing is to testify to his consciousness of the
dignity and responsibility of man. He says, "I may not change the world,
but I will not let the world change me." He has written for us for the
last twelve years, roughly speaking, articles on poverty and hard labor
showing a way which is open to all men, to resist the evil in the world
today.

What kind of a man is he?

He spent three months with us this summer, making a retreat, writing and
meeting with and talking to people in the East. One night he and another
woman and I went to a free opera over on Bleecker Street. He had never
been to an opera though his two daughters and all his family are
musicians. He shed no tears over the pathos of La Boheme but when he
came out and we looked at the Monday morning papers telling of the
shooting of a group of young gangsters who were trapped in their hideout
in Harlem, he groaned at what was happening to our youth today. He weeps
over reality, not fiction. He told me that when he saw "I was a Fugitive
from a Georgia Chain Gang" in the movies, he went home and cried all
night. He himself had been three years in Atlanta, and nine months in
solitary confinement in the first world war for being a socialist and
pacifist. "All men are brothers, and brothers do not kill one another."

It was there his conversion began in reading the Bible and he found
himself a Christian.

His grandfather had been a Catholic, but his father and his father's
seven brothers and sisters had been adopted (after his grandmother's
death) by kind neighbors, all of whom were Protestants, so he was
brought up in a Baptist atmosphere.

Tolstoi and Gandhi were the two great influences in his life. And The
Catholic Worker. He came east last summer after a seven day fast, to
make a six day retreat under Fr. Marion Casey, and it was this priest
who baptized him, in Hutchinson, Minnesota, on November 17, on the feast
of St. Gregory the Wondermaker.

While he visited with us, he won the hearts of all at *The Catholic
Worker.* When he spoke in our back courtyard, the slum neighbors hung
out of their windows to listen. He was silent for long periods when he
worked on his book, "The Story of a Catholic Anarchist" and he talked
for long hours when people wanted him to talk.

Tom Sullivan said that Ammon reminded him of Peter Maurin.

Now he is back in Phoenix, Arizona, where he hopes some day to start a
House of Hospitality to be named in honor of the Italian anarchist,
Vanzetti. He is a friend in that city of the southwest of bus driver and
banker, of Mormon and Molokan and Indian. The pacifist and anarchist
Hopi Indians count him as their friend and he has learned much from them
too.

When we spoke of the Hopi Snake dance once, he said, "You can pet a
snake, you know, but you must wet your finger first so it does not feel
harsh. Maybe it purrs, I don't know." So he has reminded me of
St. Francis, too. One of the girls at the house said that to her, he was
like Daniel Boone.

In him is no class war, no hatred of any kind. He tosses the word
"pipsqueak," a Shakespearean word, around rather freely, which is
jarring to many, and he himself says of himself that he is a braggart.
But he must speak of what he knows, and what he himself has done and can
do. Now he has been made a child of God and heir to the kingdom, and he
is going to daily communion to increase the grace that is in him, he
will indeed exult like a giant to run the race. May he work more wonders
than Gregory the Wonderworker.
