% We Appeal to You in the Name of Saint Joseph
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1953, 2.

*Summary: Appeals for all to do or give a little knowing that God will
do the rest. Says since we are all brothers we must be subject to every
living creature to be like Him, serving rather than being served. (DDLW
\#648).*

Dear fellow workers in Christ:

I am writing this appeal at Maryfarm, where our rural house of
hospitality and retreat house is crowded to the doors. Every bed in the
carriage house is taken although half a dozen of those beds are for
transients who drop in from the road for the night or week end. The
three tables are full in the dining room and there was so much extra
company on Sunday that it looked humanly impossible to stretch the food
to cover the additional guests who showed up unexpectedly. Yet it is a
miracle that is performed over and over again at The Catholic Worker.
The stories in the Lenten Gospels about the cruse of oil which was not
diminished, and the pot of meal which was never empty is repeated again
amongst us.

We have been reading the story of the Pilgrim who learned to pray
without ceasing, and since reading it, we notice how that theme recurs
over and over in the Mass. It is necessary to pray "at all times and in
all places," it reads at the beginning of the Preface is over and over
again WITHOUT CEASING we should call upon God. Ask and it shall be given
you, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you. So we
have come to you, our readers, again and again, asking you to come to
our assistance and give us what we need for food, clothing and shelter.

We none of us can do very much for each other, and really, it seems that
God does not expect very much of us. He asks us each to do just a
little, and He will do the rest. He asks us to give our mite, like the
widow's; our few loaves and fishes, like the little boy's; or handful of
meal, like the widow's; our mess of pottage like Habbakuk's; he asks us
to wash in the Jordan, a simple cure in the face of so gigantic a
physical evil as leprosy. He asks us to do just a little, and the He
takes hold and does the rest. He will do the rehabilitating, in His own
good time, He will change the heart, taking away the heart of stone, He
will comfort the afflicted, and give strength to these all but overcome
by moral conflicts.

We have been working for twenty years trying to perform the works of
mercy listed in the 25^th^ chapter of St. Matthew. And what change is
there in ourselves or those we try to serve? Who can measure these
things? "To persevere is to progress," a saintly abbot told me recently.
What change have we made in the social order? All I can see is that
Anna, who shuffles around in four coats and three hoods and in a man's
oxfords, who used to peer in the door and be served her food in the yard
like a dog, now is no longer afraid and comes in to sit down with her
fellows. She, and thousands like her, have heard the good news, "call no
man Master, for all ye are brothers," and are growing in the knowledge
that to live this doctrine means that we must be subject to every living
creature and then we will be like Him, serving rather than being served.

We know each other as brothers, in the breaking of bread, serving around
six hundred or more meals a day in New York, besides these at Peter
Maurin Farm and Maryfarm. At Peter Maurin farm Hans and Ed baked 19,200
loaves of bread this past year, and that in flour alone has cost about
\$2000. The wholesaler is content to be paid twice a year, and Tony the
grocer and the Essex street also wait. And twice a year, we look at our
empty hands and wonder what to do. And then when we read these Lenten
Lessons we are cheered.

May God prompt you to help us, giving us what you can spare, or indeed
what you cannot well spare. The widow was starving when she was asked to
give her the last bit of meal. But we can assure you that God will
return it a hundred fold. It is an historic fact. So again, in the name
of St. Joseph, we appeal.

Gratefully in Christ,   
DOROTHY DAY
