% On Pilgrimage - April 1953
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1953, 3, 8.

*Summary: Reflects on Holy Week and the themes of suffering, joy, and
gratitude. Talks of spinning wool. (DDLW \#649).*

This last week of Lent and the climax of Easter are the peak of the
year. As a holy season it is unmitigated joy. Somehow the sufferings of
daily life, the uglinesses around one are suddenly changed, lighted up,
transformed. Love, suffering, joy, all go together. It is a mystery.
""With desire, have I desired to eat the Pasch with my disciples," our
Lord Jesus Christ said. Holy Thursday gives us the strength for Good
Friday.

Many years ago, Ade Bethune made a little booklet, illustrated and
illumined with texts, THE WAY OF THE CROSS. The note of the little
pamphlet which is now out of print is joy. "You shall be sorrowful, but
your sorrow shall be turned into joy, and your joy, no man takes from
you." From station to station, as Christ proceeds from Pilate, taking
his cross, falling beneath it, meeting his mother, Simon of Cyrene,
Veronica, falling again twice, encountering the women of Jerusalem,
being stripped of his garments, being nailed to the Cross, dying, being
buried,--through all these Stations the refrain is repeated, "My yoke is
easy,--My burden light…Fear not, for I have conquered death…In the world
you shall have distress, but have confidence, I have overcome the
world." And it ends, "My grace is enough."

\*\*\*
---

Joy and gratitude go together. Gratitude for everything, giving thanks
at all times and in all places. And it is a good time to thank our
readers who are helping us in so many ways with the work. The letters
that come in with help to pay the bills are very reassuring. One reader
tells how she has turned her house into a house of hospitality for her
poorer relatives, often the shiftless ones. It expresses the folly of
love. Another is knitting cheerful afghans for us. Bishop Haas of Grand
Rapids and Archbishop O'Boyle sends us help and good letters and this is
just the beginning of answers to the appeal which goes out during the
month of St. Joseph. We are praying we have enough to catch up on the
bills and republish the book of Peter Maurin's essays which is being
redesigned by David Way, and illustrated by Fritz Eichenberg. Next
editions will be sewn, not stapled.

\*\*\*
---
I have had a few hours of spinning last month at the Peter Maurin farm.
Madeleine Sheridan of Canada, sent me a spinning wheel last year, and
Lauren

Ford of Connecticut a fleece of one of her sheep, and Ammon Hennacy the
black fleece of another. I spin as an exercise in relaxation, and to
indulge in a work which the Blessed Mother must have engaged in often.
When I learned how a few years ago, I asked her help especially.
Gandhi's followers spin for half an hour a day as part of the village
program of India, a program of reconstruction as important to our times
as the non-violent resistance which is taking place in South Africa.
Certainly I remember to pray for the leaders of India in the great task
ahead of them when I am engaged in this delightful occupation. I am
spinning the good strong wool, to knit new feet in a long pair of home
knit stockings which Ammon Hennacy wears under his rubber boots when he
spends nights irrigating. The stockings were knit by Helen Demoskoff, a
Doukobor who has just finished serving a term in prison in Ontario for
conscience's sake. We hope to have a letter from her in the next issue.
\*\*\*
---

As this goes to press a telegram arrives from Ammon Hennacy, announcing
the death of the Old Pioneer, on whose acres he lived, and whom Ammon
admired as a man of great integrity. The telegram brought joyful news
also. Linn Orme was baptized a Catholic by Fr. Dunn the night before he
died.; Ammon and the Old Pioneer had close love for each other and I was
happy indeed to have met him on my recent visit to Phoenix.

\*\*\*
---

Tomorrow I go to Staten Island to my daughters to baby-sit for a week
end, so that David and Tamar can be present at the wedding of his
youngest sister in Washington, D.C. What a joy that will be. Last time I
was there, Susie, 6, was showing me how she could read from her first
reader and the word "Jesus" kept coming up. And while she read I thought
of what the theologian Bulgakoff wrote once that many Orthodox believe
that the very saying of God's name invokes his presence; and I thought
too of Catherine of Genoa kissing the mouth of a plague stricken patient
who repeated the Holy Name after her. What is that St. Bernard says?
Jesus is music on the lips, honey in the mouth, and a shout of joy in
the heart.
