% Meditation on the Death of the Rosenbergs
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1953, 2, 6.

*Summary: An empathic reflection on the last hours before the execution
of Ethel and Julius Rosenberg who were convicted of spying for Russia.
Weaves images of children, fear of death, praying the psalms, and the
duplicity of prelates who bless US warmaking. Says we must pray for
mercy and have no part with the vindictive state. (DDLW \#654).*

At eight o'clock on Friday, June 19th the Rosenbergs began to go to
death. That June evening the air was fragrant with the smell of honey
suckle. Out under the hedge at Peter Maurin Farm, the black cat played
with a grass snake, and the newly cut grass was fragrant in the evening
air. At eight o'clock I put Nickie in the tub at my daughter's home,
just as Lucille Smith was bathing her children at Peter Maurin farm. My
heart was heavy, as I soaped Nickie's dirty little legs, knowing that
Ethel Rosenberg must have been thinking, with all the yearning of her
heart, of her own soon-to-be-orphaned children.

How does one pray when praying for "convicted spies," about to be
electrocuted? One prays always of course for mercy. "My Jesus, mercy."
"Oh Lord Jesus Christ, son of the living God, have mercy on them." But
somehow, feeling close to their humanity, I prayed for fortitude for
them both. "Oh God let them be strong, take away all fear from them, let
them be spared this suffering, at least, this suffering of fear and
trembling."

I could not help but think of the story in Dostoievsky's Idiot, how
Prince Myshkin described in detail the misery of the man about to be
executed, whose sentence was commuted at the last moment. This had been
the experience of Dostoievsky himself, and he had suffered those same
fears, and had seen one of his comrades, convicted with him, led to the
firing line, go mad with fear. Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, as their time
approached and many appeals were made, must in hoping against hope,
holding fast to hope up to the last, have compared their lot to that of
Dostoievsky and those who had been convicted with him. What greater
punishment can be inflicted on anyone than those two long years in a
death house, watched without ceasing so that there is no chance of one
taking one's life, and so thwarting the vengeance of the State. They had
already suffered the supreme penalty. What they were doing, in their own
minds no doubt, was offering the supreme sacrifice; offering their lives
for their brothers. Both Harold Urey and Albert Einstein, and many other
eminent thinkers at home and abroad avowed their belief in the innocence
of these two. They wrote that they did not believe their guilt had been
proved.

Leaving all that out of account, accepting the verdict of the court that
they were guilty, accepting the verdict of the millions of Americans who
believed them guilty, accepting the verdict of President Eisenhower and
Cardinal Spellman who thought them guilty-- even so, what should be the
attitude of the Christian but one of love and great yearning for their
salvation.

"Keep the two great commandments, love God and love your neighbor. Do
this and thou shalt live." This is in the Gospel, these are the words of
Jesus.

Whether or not they believed in Jesus, did the Rosenberg's love God? A
rabbi who attended them to the last said that they had been his
parishioners for two years. He followed them to the execution chamber
reading from the Psalms, the 23rd, the 15th, the 31st. Those same psalms
Cardinal Spellman reads every week as he reads his breviary, among those
150 psalms which make up not only the official prayer of the Church, but
also the prayer which the Jews say. We used to see our Jewish grocer on
the east side, vested for prayer; reciting the psalms every morning
behind his counter when we went for our morning supplies. I have seen
rabbis on all night coaches, praying thus in the morning. Who can hear
the Word of God without loving the Word? Who can work for what they
conceive of as justice, as brotherhood, without loving God and brother.
If they were spies for Russia they were doing what we also do in other
countries, playing a part in international politics and diplomacy, but
they indeed were serving a philosophy, a religion, and how mixed up
religion can become? What a confusion we have gotten into when Christian
prelates sprinkle holy water on scrap metal to be used for obliteration
bombing, and name bombers for the Holy Innocents, for Our Lady of Mercy;
who bless a man about to press a button which releases death on fifty
thousand human beings, including little babies, children, the sick, the
aged, the innocent as well as the guilty. "You know not of what spirit
you are," Jesus said to his apostles when they wished to call down fire
from heaven on the inhospitable Samaritans. I finished bathing the
children who were so completely free from preoccupation with suffering.
They laughed and frolicked in the tub when the switch was being pulled
which e1ectrocuted first Julius and then his wife. Their deaths were
announced over the radio half an hour later, jazz music being
interrupted to give the bulletin; and the program continuing immediately
after.

The next day the New York Times gave details of the last hours, and the
story was that both went to their deaths firmly, quietly, with no
comment. At the last Ethel turned to one of the two police matrons who
accompanied her and clasping her by the hand, pulled her toward her and
kissed her warmly. Her last gesture was a gesture of love.

They were children of that race to which Mary, and Jesus and Joseph, the
Holy Family, belonged. In their humanity they more closely resembled
Jesus than we do who are not Jews. For that, too, we must love them.
"Spiritually we are Semites," Pope Pius XI said. For that we must love
them. "Father, forgive them for they know not what they do." For that
saying we must love them.

Let us have no part with the vindictive State and let us pray for Ethel
and Julius Rosenberg. There is no time with God, and prayer is
retroactive. By virtue of the prayers we may say in the future, at the
moment of the death which so appallingly met them, they will have been
given the grace to choose light rather than darkness. Love rather than
Hate. May their souls, as well as the souls of the faithful departed,
rest in peace.
