% Faith and Workers in Siberia
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, March 1954, 3, 8.

*Summary: Digest of news stories of organized underground efforts by
political prisoners in Russia culminating in a strike by miners. Focuses
on the role of faith in this non-violent struggle. (DDLW \#662).*

(Since writing this the same series has appeared in the N.Y. Herald
Tribune.)

A report of an organized resistance movement in the labor camps of
Siberia was published last month, in a series of articles signed by
Brigitte Gerland and sent out from Munich and published by the London
Observer and the Montreal Star. One of our readers in Montreal sent us
the clippings of the story which appeared in three installments, Feb.
8-10 and the following is a digest of the account. This is a report from
the people from below, and quite as creditable as any report from "the
top," such as U. S. News Weekly for Feb. 26.

Miss Gerland was a Berlin girl who was arrested in the Soviet Zone in
1946 for lending articles to a West Berlin paper. She was sentenced to
fifteen years in a labor camp and served seven of them.

When she arrived at Vorkurta, a huge mining camp in Artic Russia where a
town of half a million prisoners had grown up, she was ushered into huge
barracks where she found herself in the midst of groups of different
types of prisoners: Ukrainians, Russians, farmers and students. It is
only since 1949 that political prisoners have been allowed to mingle
since that date marked a change in the camp system, when political
prisoners were sent to more strongly guarded camps. All prisoners were
also given improved rations, not only because of a peace time economy
but in order that they might work better. "The forced laborers forming a
vital element in the Soviet economy were no longer supposed to die."

There was bitter enmity between the Ukrainians and Russians. Brigitte
was thrown in with Russians who were children of former leaders of the
Soviet state, after whose purging they were sent to orphanages. They
struggled through the universities "only by endless efforts and tricks.
Now these would-be philosophers, historians or economists sat in the
camp with 25 years of forced labor as their only future and seemed
perfectly content with their fate." They had found contact with a great
number of like-minded fellow workers and were "free" at last to discuss
their ideas openly.

The movement among them is said to have started in 1948 as a result of
discussion on the long-banned pessimistic poetry of Boris Pasternak. He
wrote in the twenties and claimed that spiritual freedom was
incompatible with social justice. "Their system was devised as an answer
to this pessimism, a way of making room for spiritual freedom in a
collectivist society by decentralization of State Power, until the State
could finally be replaced altogether by workers and peasants'
syndicates, or unions to use the American term."

By writing, posting leaflets, holding small meetings of flying
discussion groups, the movement spread like wild fire among the
students. Finally in 1950 great numbers of them were arrested and sent
to labor camps. They called themselves the true Disciples of Lenin, and
yet the writer comments that his message had changed greatly in their
interpretation, assuming syndicalist, even anarchist features, one might
even say the distributist emphasis.

Members of this movement were holding their meetings when they were
still free in Russia, behind locked doors and it had been born of a
rejection of both the Stalinist dictatorship on the one hand and the
materialist capitalistic west on the other. They said that they were not
ready to be seduced by nylons and motor cars. What they wanted was
social justice.

When Brigitte Gerlend arrived at camp, they admitted that they were not
being starved or ill treated, but the work was what was killing them.
Carrying bricks for fourteen hours a day in bitter cold was torture.
They were being turned into dull robots.

The Believers
---

Here they began to learn from another group in the camp called "The
Believers," who refused to work for the state but only in service for
others. After years of bitter struggle over this issue they had won out
and were now only being employed in work for their fellow prisoners.
This showed that resistance was indeed possible in the camps.

These articulate, thinking, arguing students were now brought into
contact with this far greater underground, of whose existence they had
previously known nothing. They found members who sat in their huts
copying out the New Testament and the Gospels because printed ones were
confiscated when found. One young believer said that she had been a
member of the Young Communist League working as a technician in a
factory and not at all badly off materially speaking. But she was not
content with her work and found refuge more and more in books. Coming
across a copy of the New Testament which she had never read before, she
experienced a conversion. She determined to start a new life based on
the word of the Gospel. Fortunately for this girl, whose name was
Tamara, when she spoke of it to another girl in the factory whom she
trusted, she found that she was a member of a circle of brothers and
sisters who were not only reading the Gospel together but tried to
spread it everywhere, above all in the factories and collective farms.
"I learned through them that love alone is creative," she said.

With this new found companion in faith, she left her family and went to
a collective farm in distant central Asia. They were eventually arrested
by the secret police and sent to hard labor in Siberia.

The success of the believers in getting the kind of work they wanted
encouraged the students so much that the idea of a strike began to be
discussed in 1950. After Stalin's death and their hopes of amnesty for
political and religious prisoners was disappointed, they renewed their
agitation. When finally a strike was started in 1953 by the Ukrainian
prisoners, it spread to all the mine pits. By July 23 fifty pits were
idle. Two hundred and fifty thousand prisoners, half the population, had
joined the strike.

The demands made by the strikers were most unusual. They called for the
release of all the prisoners who would however, voluntarily undertake to
remain as free workers and settlers in the region for another five
years.

By August first 100 of the leaders were shot.

On August 4th, Briggite Gerlend was transferred to another camp, but
when she left the strike was still going on.
