% Help Wanted
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1954, 2.

*Summary: Overflowing with the destitute and broke, she implores St.
Joseph to move readers to help. Praises the work with the poor of The
Little Brothers of Jesus. (DDLW \#665).*

  ----------------------- --------------------
  ST. JOSEPH'S HOUSE  
  ST. JOSEPH'S FEAST  
  THE CATHOLIC WORKER  MARCH, 1954  
  223 CHRYSTIE ST.          
  NEW YORK CITY 2, N.Y.   
  ----------------------- --------------------

Dear fellow workers in Christ:

It is spring and crocus and snow drops are in bloom over on Staten
Island, the springtide brings in more drift wood on the beach and a
little sickle of a moon hangs over the cherry tree by the barn. The sun
is getting warmer on the drooped backs of the men on our soup line these
mid-March days. The line is growing longer because unemployment is
mounting.

Here at St. Joseph's house of hospitality we are full to the doors, with
men sleeping on the library floor. Peter Maurin farm is full to the
eaves, and Maryfarm too.

Last week Pere Rene Voillaume, head of The Little Brothers of Jesus,
whose headquarters are in France, came to speak to us and we were filled
with enthusiasm for this new order which is made up of men who work for
their living, and go out two and three, to all parts of the world, where
they live with the poorest. They are not thinking in terms of
civilization or culture, or point four programs, but simply of love and
friendship. To work, to suffer, to be poor with others. They were not
starting houses, clinics, schools, but were living so poor that there
was nothing else to give, but just themselves. We envied them this
Franciscan poverty and thought, "how much better this work than ours."
And we looked around our house with its large family, much as parents
look at the mouths to be fed and the bodies to be clothed and wonder how
we manage with so many. Well, it is the Lord's doing. We never intended
this when we started printing Peter Maurin's ideas on hospitality. We
were just a few, but there was always room for one more at the table,
always enough food to share, always a place to bed down one more. (A
mother and baby are sleeping in our dining room at the farm now.) Pere
Voillaume showed us slides, pictures of the places where the Little
Brothers and Sisters lived, among the pygmies, among the Indians, in
working class districts, and indeed their houses were so small, no more
than three could be crowded in.

Yes, this work is better than ours, and there are and have been many
better works than ours. We all long for the freedom and the simplicity
of a St. Francis. But this is the work that it seems the Lord intends us
to do since He sends us the destitute in such numbers, and sends us too,
our friends and readers to help us. "The poor are the first children of
the Church," Bossuet wrote. Over and over again Jesus told us to feed
the hungry, to feed our enemy even. He told us not to banquet our
friends and relatives but to call in the poor. And the first directions
St. John, the Precursor, gave was "Let him who has two coats give to him
who has none."

St. Joseph, this is your month, and it is also Lent. You lived like the
Little Brothers, at hard manual labor, and you surely understood
concerning the needy and the poor. You were without shelter when you
hunted a bed for a wife about to have a Child; you must have suffered
with hunger and thirst in that journey across the desert into a strange
land where you are supposed to have lived seven years. We beg you to
move the hearts of our readers, so that when we tell them how broke we
are, how high the bills are piled for groceries, for fuel, for light,
they will be moved to help us, by their prayers and alms giving.

Gratefully yours in Christ,

DOROTHY DAY
