% From The Mailbag
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1954, 3, 8.

*Summary: Highlights from letters from those connected to the Catholic
Worker community. She extols their hard work and struggles. (DDLW
\#677).*

It is so hard to print letters in full that once in a while we will try
to give our readers a sample of our mail by synopsizing some of the
letters we receive during the course of the month.

From Ernest Lundgren: He and Hans Tunnesen are busy working at St.
Joseph's Farm, Cape May Courthouse, taking jobs on the side painting and
carpentering, and using the money to build up the house and outbuildings
which they eventually hope to be another little retreat house like
Maryfarm, especially for families who will come weekends and camp out
around the place in tents and trailers and what outbuildings they can
put up. This is a fine team to work together, both of them ex-seamen,
one a Swede, one a Norwegian, both converts. They drive up often to
Peter Maurin Farm for Sunday dinner.

From Andy Spillane, another seaman who goes round the world on the S.S.
President Monroe, and keeps us informed as to his whereabouts with
postals which the children and all of us love. At present he is in
Bombay and will go from there to Karachi, to Pakistan, to the Suez Canal
and to Europe. He tells of sitting at a little caf√© watching the world
go by. "Outside the door all the cooking is done in the open in little
pots. Of course they are poor people, in congested slums, it's a sad
sight everywhere, and it's the same nearly everywhere else."

T. Ryah, 156 Durham Rd. Sparkhill, Birmingham 11, England, tells of a
Guild of Catholic Paper Sellers, under the patronage of the English
Martyrs, approved by His Lordship Bishop Bright. "This is a lay Guild
composed at the moment of professional men and factory workers, working
in their spare time, knocking at doors, selling on the streets, at
meetings held in the public squares, outside factories, in fact,
anywhere crowds gather, not omitting outside church doors after each
Mass. A mention in your own paper would be appreciated as we wish to
extend the Guild."

M. Ellanor Drouin of Biddeford sends us a wonderful article from
**Worship** about Cardinal Lercaro of Bologna, who said when he came to
his new diocese three years ago, "I was born poor, I have lived poor,
and everything I have is yours." And he added, "Woe to me, if one day I
should go to bed without being worn out by exhaustion." From Ravenna
where he had been bishop, he brought along five boys, waifs whom he had
personally rescued from the Po river flood and whom he had given a home
in his own bishops' palace. He now has twelve more and they sit at the
same table with him, and he helps them with their lessons at night. (At
St. Vincent's hospital the other day I saw a blind Indian boy whom our
own Cardinal Spellman brought back with him from India some time ago for
special treatment here.)

From Mario and Estelle Carota and all the Carota family at 2627 Haste
St., Berkeley, Calif. They had just moved back into the city from their
Agnus Dei Farm at Aptos, with their thirteen children. They don't like
the city, but they cannot support themselves on the land yet. They are
still hoping to get a family industry going. They are living right now
in an old sorority house which has seven bedrooms, and they tell me
there is room on the parlor couch for me when I come west to visit. They
have great praise for the Christian Family Movement, and the particular
branch they are speaking of is made up of Mexicans and Negroes and the
chaplain is Fr. Garcia. "He is a wonderful priest and works with the
minority groups in this country. Mario teaches one night a week
catechism to couples about to be married in the church. It is so little
for us to do when Father has so many couples asking for instruction that
he could use three other priests, plus lots of lay help. He has no
rectory, he visits and says Mass now at labor camps, as does Fr.
McCullough all the year round. Fr. Garcia's little book is filled with
appointments with families which he is always on the fly to keep. As I
write, Mario is developing pictures for a poem he is writing in pictures
about the family. If he ever finishes it I will send you a copy. Carrol
McCool of St. Collette House in Oakland came for a short visit and he
says he gets discouraged with the system but just keeps going which is
very edifying to us."

From Arthur and Emilia Vigil, who are part of a lay missionary group in
Mexico are working with two other families, all of whom are working with
Fr. Donald Hessler, Maryknoll priest and his group. Bishop Lane has
written of the necessity of whole families entering the mission field.
They are more effective than the single apostles since through the
children, and through the needs of the family, they reach their brothers
among those around them. Anyone interested in helping these families who
are giving themselves for three year periods to the mission and need the
support of the faithful to keep them there and to provide them with the
materials for clinics, cisterns, farming, and other works of mercy write
and ask them to send their circular letter from Calle 15 de Septiembre,
No. 22, Chatumal, Quintana Roo, Mexico.
