% On Pilgrimage - June 1955
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1955, 1, 6.

*Summary: Discusses the problems with the selling of Maryfarm, the
difficulties of construction at Peter Maurin Farm and extends an appeal
for assistance. Recounts her trip to Montreal, Canada and her encounters
with the various communities and people who live with the poor there.
She concludes with a reflection on the values of work and silence. (DDLW
\#687).*

My pilgrimages for some time now will be between New York and Staten
Island, what with the changes that have been going on in the work and
staff. Tom Sullivan's entrance into the Trappist Monastery at Conyers,
Georgia will come as a great surprise to the readers of **Chrystie
Street**. We are all praying that he will be praying for us, and
although we miss him, we feel that in many ways he is closer than ever
to us all.

We are trying again to dispose of Maryfarm, Newburgh, perhaps on a 99
year lease, and so the retreat in June will be the last to be held
there. Fr. Casey will give our annual retreat there, and we hope that
the next will be at Peter Maurin Farm, Staten Island. As it is we are
going to have a day of recollection there one Sunday a month from now on
and later we aim at a weekly conference on Sunday afternoon with
vespers, rosary, benediction and compline after.

Activity
--------

Right now there is a skeleton crew (a dozen people) at Maryfarm, and
John Filliger is at Peter Maurin Farm helping Hans and Fr. Duffy, with
the building and farming there. The carriage house is being made into
two rooms, and there will be an additional room in the carpenter shop.
Behind the chapel there is a large room which will hold several men, and
of course the dormitories in both hay lofts, on either side of the
chapel will take in the rest of the family. The women will be a little
crowded for a while in the main house. The problem will be for us to
keep the men warm in winter. At Maryfarm there were innumerable little
stoves, wood-burning or coal-burning, according to the health and age of
the room's occupant. Most of the cold months they burned coal. Another
example of how expensive it is to be poor!

As soon as the carriage house is completed, the work on the new chapel
will begin and we are very ambitious there. We want a basement to
contain an oil burner, four rooms to house our resident priests and
visitors and then the chapel. Philip Jebb, architect and son of
Distributist editor Jebb, and grandson of Hilaire Belloc, who is
visiting this country, is drawing up some plans for us. Other friends
are studying New York City building codes, and whether or not we would
be permitted to use the good clay all around us and the field stone to
make a rammed earth building.

Help Needed
-----------

In spite of the fact that we are aiming to sell one farm, paying off the
mortgages, paying back taxes, and our piled up bills, we will be taking
whatever money we can get for Maryfarm, and it will come in installments
at that. There is also a \$4,000 mortgage on Maryfarm. So I am afraid we
are never going to be any richer, no matter how much buying and selling
we do. The way we are building the two rooms in the carriage house is
this: first lumber, and cement and sand and building blocks came from
lecture money from Montreal where I visited last month. Second batch of
lumber comes from \$20 Carol Perry contributed. The Marist Fathers
contributed some flooring, and Frank O'Donnell some beams, and so it
goes. It's hard on the builders, especially when a good carpenter and
cement man comes along and offers his services free, and then no
materials to work with! The lumber yard won't give us credit or we would
be tempted to buy ahead!

Anybody want to help build a chapel? To be very direct, we have the
workers, (and labor is one third the cost). We do need money for this
project.

Canada
------

Last month pressure of events kept me from reporting on my visit to
Canada. I spent only a week there but could fill the paper with all the
people I met and the places I visited. There is not time to write in
detail about the shrine of St. Joseph's and of Brother Andre and they
are well known anyway. Fr. Murchland offered Holy Mass for us in the
original little chapel and showed us all over the Mount, and it is
glorious to see and best of all we loved the little room where Brother
Andre lived with his oil stove, his little iron bed, and his few sticks
of furniture. The devil bothered him so, just as he bothered the Cure
d'Ars, that he took to himself a roommate, a sick barber, who slept in
the same room with him, and to whom Bro. Andre ministered.

(We should be praying to Brother Andre as well as to St. Joseph, and of
course Mother Cabrini, for these modest building projects of ours. Fr.
Murchland is editor of the magazine published at the shrine and it is a
very good one too.)

We began our visit to Montreal by going to the Mass at the shrine, which
is offered up every evening at nine o'clock, and we ended it by my
morning visit with Marjorie Connors who is in charge of Patricia house
for women, on Murray street.

Labre House
-----------

The men's hospice, Labre House, on Duke street, is not more than ten
blocks away, and Tony Walsh who initiated and keeps going this work of
hospitality in Montreal was being plagued by the necessity of moving at
the end of the week. We had lunch there one day, a group of us and we
were greatly impressed by the good foundation they have made. Even if
like Don Bosco they have to move again and again, each place they visit
will be a home, a center, and the impress will remain among the people
with whom they settle. There are weekly meetings, and the new paper
published by the group, called Unity, will deal with the work of the lay
apostolate.

You can subscribe by writing to Tony Walsh, UNITY, 123 Duke Street,
Montreal.

Patricia House
--------------

I stayed at Patricia House while in Montreal, and felt greatly
privileged to be in the same house with the Little Sisters of Charles de
Foucauld who live upstairs in their little Fraternity, which is made up
of the upper floors of two old houses. Patricia House is one floor of
one of the houses, and the back door looks out on a swamp of mud, a
courtyard on which opens other small houses where families of twelve and
fourteen people live. Here is real destitution. Patricia House is the
poorest house on the street.

Mrs. Connors is sharing the little four room place (in which
nevertheless four people can be accommodated) with another woman just at
present, and every afternoon at supper time there is a group of children
in the neighborhood who come in for supper. Clothes are distributed all
the time, and there are always some of the women in the neighborhood to
be found sitting over a companionable cup of tea or coffee with Mrs.
Connors, pouring out some of the troubles of the neighborhood. The
kitchen just holds a stove, sink and big square table which can seat
eight children at a time. Usually about sixteen come in every night for
the supper, of stew, soup and rolls and coffee. The politeness of these
little French children from this dismal slum can be measured by the fact
that I took a nap behind the curtain while Marjorie served supper. She
loves to cook, and cooking with love, everything she serves is
delicious. She cooks, she builds fires in the obstreperous stove and how
she ever kept warm in a Montreal winter, is a mystery. The place is so
small one always either roasts or freezes. It has the same clammy walls
Mott street had. But Marjorie is a happy creature and it is sure that
the love of God warms her as she too warms others around her.

Little Sisters
--------------

It poured rain that first morning I was there, and to open either front
or back door meant going through a Niagara. Gutters are unknown here. We
went through this cold shower bath to get upstairs to the Little Sisters
of Charles de Foucauld who have the apartment and the garret above us.
Although only two or three usually live in these "Fraternities" there
are seven there now, what with some of the little sisters waiting to get
working visa's to the U.S. so they can open the first house in Chicago.
The little chapel (there is a Holy Hour every Thursday which our friends
attend) is bare and beautiful with an altar made of three blocks of
wood. The stations are crosses, there are twelve square stools for the
Little Sisters to sit on. Adjoining it there is a sitting room and
kitchen. Upstairs there is a dormitory in the attic. I am going to have
dinner with them on Thursday before the Holy Hour. From seven to eight
on Thursday Dr. Seng has a little clinic for the children in the
neighborhood downstairs at Patricia House.

Foyer de Charitie
-----------------

Leo Kinbough is an old friend of ours who came to make retreats at
Maryfarm, Easton, and since those early days he has had much to do with
the beginnings of the community of poor families which came somehow or
other to become the Foyer de Charitie, the beginnings of a house of
divine providence like that of Joseph Cottelengo in Italy. Leo is one of
the few who have had a vision of a community of **families** dedicated to
voluntary poverty (not destitution) since they had little homes and
ground to till, a combination of private and common property such as
Peter dreamed of in his farming communes. A start was made, and some
families are still there, but now the weight of the effort has been put
behind the hospital and the care of the **single** destitute person.
Just as many other family community efforts have failed, and mainly for
want of the physical and financial support of the single and
unencumbered, so too Leo's work is a seed which has fallen into the
ground and died. It is following the pattern of all work for Christ. The
personalist and communitarian revolution which Emmanuel Mounier wrote of
is still unbalanced in that the emphasis is still on the personalist
instead of on the communitarian.

Samaritains
-----------

A group in Montreal, the Samaritains, however, have been dedicating
their help to families this last fourteen years. There are 75 or 80 of
them (I am not sure of my figures) and they live in community under the
direction of Abbe Saey of St. Irene's parish on Atwater street. There
are three centers, one of them an infirmary, which is the most
attractive of the three. After a short but good visit with Fr. Saey, and
obtaining his blessing, one of the Samaritains took us down the street
to a big corner store which was curtained in white and indistinguishable
form the surrounding stores by any mark except cleanliness. On opening
the store door, however, the inner door showed a crucifix, and holy
water font. When we went in the first thing, aside from the women who
were engaged in various works of sewing, mending, cooking, etc., was two
long rows of black bound books on the wall.

They are the writings of the saints, our guide told us, St. John
Chrysostom and others of the early fathers, right down to the saints
recently canonized.

The girls wear a uniform garb, black, dark blue or grey, very plain and
serviceable, and rather like that of modern orders of women, such as the
Missionary Servants of the Holy Trinity. Some of the girls have work
rooms and make all the clothes, from heavy overcoats to denim aprons and
dark dresses.

Two things I had heard of these women and girls were most striking and
made me want to know more of them. One was that they served the poor
families, going out two by two working one day at cooking, washing,
cleaning, and spending the next day in prayer. That does not mean that
the needy family with the sick mother went without help that alternate
day. While one girl prayed, the other worked. There was refreshment for
soul and mind and body so that there was no danger of their becoming
"empty cisterns."

Silence
-------

The other great thing which struck me was the fact that aside from a
little necessary talk in the families when they were at work, they kept
complete silence. That silence was the most useful for work too, as they
were there to work, not to waste time in conversation with the family
they helped. They could listen, they could talk a little, but the work
came first, serving the family.

I enjoyed my visit with the girls very much. For one thing, they know
**The Catholic Worker** and their faces broke into radiant smiles to
greet us. Leo did what interpreting was necessary, and our guide also
spoke English.

Work
----

Just before I left New York Ammon Hennacy and I had visited the little
Fourth Street Play House and saw Chekoff's Three Sisters which was
excellently done, and one of the things which amused us just as much as
their nostalgia for the city and the future and the boredom with the
present, was the nostalgia for work. What is needed, two of the most
attractive characters kept insisting, was the "one should work," work to
exhaustion, so that one could fall asleep feeling one had earned his
rest.

One character, the fiance up to the time he was killed in a duel, was
always on the way to work in the lumber yard, having given up his
service in the army, which Tolstoi pointed out was an excuse in those
days for doing nothing. "Soldiering on the job" as an expression dates
from the times when there were few battles and the life of the army was
an honorable and irresponsible one. In our days the white collar job,
the clerk's position, is looked to by immigrant parents as a release for
their children from drudgery of manual labor.

Work, prayer, silence, these are the works, the spiritual arms of the
Samaritains. They are the "just men" who are saving Canada. Silence is
the rarest spiritual work of the day. Once Aldous Huxley on reading in
**The Catholic Worker** about the silence of our retreats and the effort
to have silence in our retreathouse, sent us a check for twenty five
dollars. "Anything to further the cause of silence," he wrote. Here
there is truly silence, and the hard work which means earning one's
living by the sweat of one's brow. The spirit of love was palpable and
there was none of the somberness one might expect from the rigorous
lives these women lead. In the infirmary the work is suffering and
silence and prayer, and what work is necessary to keep the place going.

And this silence was chosen by the girls themselves after some years of
working together, and only consented to by Fr. Saey, because of their
insistence. "Since then," he remarked once to Leo, "they have had peace
and so have I."
