% May Day -- 1956
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1956, 2.

*Summary: Expresses deep gratitude for Peter Maurin's vision and life.
Intermingles appreciations of Peter and St. Joseph's gifts to the works
of the CW. (DDLW \#704).*

May Day
-------

Recognizing May Day as a workers' feast day, our Holy Father, Pope Pious
XII, last year, designated May first as the feast of St. Joseph, the
Workman, and for many reasons we are delighted to celebrate this feast
from now on. We used to think of May Day as our old radical holiday; the
anniversary of the first issue of the Catholic Worker to appear on the
streets of New York in 1933; the beginning of Mary's month, when little
children walked in procession dressed in white veils, laden with
flowers, crowning our Lady, Queen of the May. A joyful time, a time when
winter is over and gone and the buds are bursting out on all the trees,
the spring peepers are heard down the brook at the Staten Island farm
and there is promise of warmth in the air. May is also Peter Maurin's
month, not only because he is responsible for **The Catholic Worker**
movement but also because he died on May 15. He fought the good fight
and gave everything to God, body, soul and mind and he is in the company
of our Lady, and St. Joseph and St. Therese and joyful doctrine of the
communion of saints!

Peter Maurin was born in May and died on May 15th, 1949, and we hope
many of our readers will remember him in their prayers. It is the best
way for all of us to pay the enormous debt of gratitude we owe him for
the work which he gave us to do. He set us on a particular path,
outlined a particular program, built up a theory of revolution which
will last us as a guide for the rest of our lives. Truly Peter was a man
who walked with God, who practiced the presence of God, who prayed
without ceasing, who never uttered an idle word, who never judged
others, who lived a life of utter poverty on the Skid Rows of our
country, who practiced the works of mercy at a personal sacrifice, and
yet his whole stress was on the primacy of the spiritual. Poverty to him
meant freedom, and he rejoiced in giving away his coat, his bed, his
food because it left him freer for the spiritual work of mercy,
enlightening the ignorant. Strangely enough, our attempts to put into
practice his teaching worked out quite differently for us. When we gave
away clothes, furniture, food and lodging, when we made St. Joseph the
household patron, he took care of things so that we were kept on that
level. He sent us goods to distribute, property to administer, food and
shelter for our brothers in Christ who came to us. There was not much
room for pride of intellect in us when we are so busy running houses of
hospitality and farms, and doing it so badly too. The work itself
clarifies Peter's teaching. St. Joseph never fails. He always answers
petitions. He founds homes from the Blessed Mother and Child, protected
them in exile, worked for them with all the strength of young and
vigorous manhood. He was a man, and a saint, and we who believe in the
resurrection of the body and life everlasting, can go to him now today
in thanksgiving and joy and ask him for the same abundance of spiritual
flavors that he has granted us materially. In our recent difficulties
the press was kind to us of course and so was Judge Nichol in an upside
down kind of way. But it was St. Joseph who provided the wherewithal to
keep our House of Hospitality and **Catholic Worker** headquarters
going. We thank him, and thank God for giving him to us. D.D.
