% Review of 'Weaving:The Art and Craft of Hand Weaving'
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, May 1956, 4.

*Summary: Review of a book on hand weaving. Discusses spinning and
weaving engaged in by herself, her daughter Tamar and friends. Says
using our hands is a way to discover the sacramentality of things. (DDLW
\#705).*

Lili Blumenau is familiar to some of the Catholic Workers since she made
a retreat with us some years ago at Easton, Pa. and in the ten years
since then has taught three or four of our number the fundamentals of
weaving. She has a studio on Tenth Street, off Fourth Avenue, and she is
an instructor in weaving at Teachers' College, Columbia University, and
the Fashion Institute of Technology. This book she has written tells of
the evolution of spinning and weaving from thousands of years before
Christ, and there are beautiful illustrations of basket weaving,
Egyptian spinning implements, wall paintings of spinners and weavers in
Egypt down to present day photographs of girdle looms among the Indians
of Guatemala. One illustration is of a Coptic child's tunic of natural
linen, plain weave, decorated with tapestry woven motifs in bright
colors, which dates from the fifth century. This tunic is in Cooper
Union Museum not far from the Catholic Worker and I must certainly go to
see it. It is very like the baptismal robes some of our friends are
making today. There are not only pictures of every kind of loom and tool
but a clear explanation of their uses. There is one section of the book
given to design. At the end, a buyers' guide for looms and accessories,
yarns and a very good bibliography and index.

Every one who has come to Peter Maurin Farm has been very much
interested in our loom and spinning wheels, one from the Hutterites of
Montana, one from French Canada and two from India. We are also, Tamar
and Susie and I, familiarizing ourselves with the spindle, that small
wooden stick with a round wheel which is the earliest of spinning
implements and has been made of stone, metal or wood. By twirling this
tick Tamar has been able to make very even thread from wool and flax.
The children are beginning a scrap book of pictures of sheep, their
sheering, the carding, washing, spinning and weaving of wool and it is a
fascinating compilation which takes in discussion of village industries
in India and Israel, and the latest, today, a picture of a loom clipped
from the Catholic Charities Drive folder. You hear a great deal about
these crafts in jails and veterans' hospitals and mental hospitals.
"After the horse is stolen the barn door is locked." We need to use our
hands, to develop skills, to rediscover the sacramentality of things. To
whittle, to knit, to crochet, to mould in clay, to weave, to darn or
mend also, - - all of these are the quiet occupations which make for
Peace. Besides, as Peter Maurin used to say, men make their millions by
the machine and spend them for **hand made** articles, rugs, drapes,
tapestries, linens, clothing.

One of our friends who made a retreat with us, who was not at all
satisfied with her office and clerical work, began to learn to weave
with Lili Blumenau and became so proficient that she was able to design
and weave samples for manufacturers (all of which work can be done in
the home on a small loom) so that perhaps she will one day attain to
rural living and have her own sheep and produce her own wool.

Lauren Ford, the artist, of Sheep Fold, Bethlehem, Connecticut, every
year has given us fleeces of wool which we have washed, dyed, teased,
carded, spun and woven and sometimes knit into various garments. And we
are only beginners, who do this in odd moments with visitors and
friends.

Do get the book and start to weave your own drapes, couch covers,
towels, scarves and hand bags.
