% On Pilgrimage - February 1957
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1957, 1, 2, 7.

*Summary: Describes her stay in prison after protesting air raid drills
and notes it was comfortable. Decries the many women there because of
drug charges. Mourns the sudden death of Paulina Sturm and writes
appreciative obituary of her involvements with the Catholic Worker and
work for justice. (DDLW \#717).*

When I think of the long sentences served by so many others in so many
miscarriages of justice, when I think of the accumulation of prisons,
outmoded and futile that dot the land of the free, I am not particularly
interested in writing about my few days in jail last month. I am just
glad that I served them, and am ready to serve again if there is another
compulsory air raid drill next summer. It is a gesture perhaps, but a
necessary one. Silence means consent, and we cannot consent to the
militarization of our country without protest. Since we believe that the
air raid drills are part of a calculated plan to inspire fear of the
enemy instead of the love which Jesus Christ told us we should feel
toward him we must protest these drills. It is an opportunity to show we
mean what we write when we repeat over and over, that man is here on
this earth, to love God and His brother. We love our country and have no
wish to give up citizenship as Stanley Borowsky announced he wished to
do. Peter Maurin felt himself to be not a Frenchman or an American, but
first of all a Catholic, but just the same loved both the country of his
birth and his adopted country where he had worked for forty years.

It was good to have the opportunity to "visit the prisoner," which is
one of the works of mercy, even for so brief a visit, by being a
prisoner one's self. One of the Little Sisters of Charles de Foucauld
has had herself committed to a prison in France in order that she might
live with her less fortunate sisters, and in her confinement live a life
of work and prayer.

We have no complaint to make of the prison or of the attendants there.
Our physical needs were supplied, blankets, sheets, towels, clothing.
What if the clothing were a bit coarse, unbleached muslin and not cut to
fit? What if the dress were a purple sack coming just below the knees! I
would not say we were clothed with modesty, nor in Christian fashion,
but we were clothed. Our food was coarse but adequate, a little too much
rice and spaghetti of course. The cells were tiny and crowded but they
were both warm and airy. One could open the window as wide as one liked
or all of the five little panes. One pane of glass even was clear so
that we could look out on Greenwich street, on the swirling snow, the
slushy streets, the people rushing to and fro, the brightly lit stores,
the flower shop, food stores, all in the heart of Greenwich Village.

We were given thorough physical examinations, even to x-rays and
Wasserman tests. There was a recreation room on the roof, a beauty
parlor, a craftshop and in the few days we were there we were taught by
a gentle tacher to make some brass enameled ashtrays. If there had been
more time we could have worked in clay, leather, bound a book, dressed
dolls.

The "ladies" as they called us, worked in the laundry, kitchen, sewing
rooms, cleaning and so on. We were given mop and pail to clean the
corridors. But there was never enough work for the 500 or so prisoners
so there were many idle. I saw one girl display with pride a dress she
has made for herself so there is a chance to learn a few useful things.

But the sadness of it all is that aside from talking day in and day out
about freedom, and "how much time you got" and "when do you get out?"
there are some there who are truly happy. Quite a few of the women who
have lived with us at St. Joseph's House of Hospitality have spent short
terms there for disorderly conduct and drinking, and I remember one Jean
especially. She was staying with us on Staten Island and as we all sat
around the table one night sewing and talking, (she was playing
solitaire) she suddenly said, "I never was so happy as when I was in the
clink." Born and bred on the Bowery, of a drunken father and mother, all
her family scattered, she looked upon the jail as a place of comfort and
security, a place where she could not get into much trouble, where there
was warmth and companionship and movies on Saturday night and television
every night until nine, and nobody expecting much of her, just taking
her as she was. It is sad too that there is nothing much to come out to,
not enough hospices, just the prospect of going back to the same old
taverns to find your friends, to the same old work with its tensions and
dirt and insecurity, and far more expected of you than you are able to
give.

"I don't like to work," one little Puerto Rican said to me. She spent
most of her time lying on her cot, singing melancholy songs.

"What kind of work were you doing?" "Laundry work and I'm here for being
a pickpocket," and she covered her face with her hands in mock shame,
and laughed at me.

Why are all jails so full, and why are the searches so rigid? And why
are they all so young these girls that fill the four corridors on the
six or seven floors of the House of Detention which are used as cell
blocks. It is mostly drugs, and the girls themselves say the problem is
hopeless. "We will get out, and then we will be here again."

I remembered an article I had read in the magazine section of the New
York Times, on drug addiction, and the way it is handled in England and
the way it is handled here. "Of course it is not a crime," one of the
officers said to me. "But it is treated as a crime, and it certainly
leads to more crime." The Times has also called the Women's Detention
Prison a "black hole," because it is overcrowded, because girls are held
there long before trial as well as after conviction. But physically
speaking, it is not a black hole. The sad fact remains that it is more
comfortable physically than many a slum tenement with its overcrowding,
its vermin, its cold and dark and lack of hot water.

Our physical needs are cared for, but certainly not the spiritual. If
you go in on Monday, you do not see a priest until the following
Saturday, and if you ask for a rosary or prayer book, or Bible, you do
not get it. And you wonder if there is any visitation, any preaching,
any telling the stories of the lives of the saints, any glimpse for
these prisoners of any other kind of life than the one they know of the
flesh. Or is it only a half-hour Mass, one half-hour out of the one
hundred and sixty eight hours of the week, thirty minutes out of the
10,080 minutes of the week?

We beg our readers to pray for prisoners, since we cannot perform the
work of mercy of visiting them.

Paulina Sturm is dead and we all feel griefstricken here at the
**Catholic Worker**. She was only 31 years old, she was a widow, a
convert, the mother of a ten year old daughter, Joanna. When you are
writing the obituary of an older person, who has lived his life, who has
run his course, you can write with some joy in the faith that we have of
everlasting life, that "life is changed, not taken away." But it is hard
to feel that God wills so early a death. It is by His permissive will of
course that all things happen, but doctors and scientists work hard to
save that precious gift of life, so that it may run its usual three
score and ten years. But there always remains the mystery of suffering
and death.

We first heard from Paulina on the feast of St. Anthony a few years ago.
It is an involved story, and I shall tell it and run the risk of being
accused of seeing signs and wonders. I was in possession of a first
class relic of St. Anthony of Padua, (without the papers authenticating
it) which had been given to Caroline Gordon by Stark Young (two famous
people in the literary world) and by her to me. I wore it around my neck
in a reliquary of silver made by one of Ammon Hennacy's Hopi Indian
friends. On that feast day I felt very discouraged with my writing and
stopped to say a prayer to St. Anthony. I reminded him of the relic I
wore, and begged his help to make up my mind about the piece of writing
I was doing. When I returned from Mass there was a letter from Paulina
Sturm in her beautiful script, much like Peter Maurin's in its careful
lettering, and in addition to a large gift, she told me how much she
liked my last book and urged me to go on writing.

Ammon sent her his book also and when she came to visit us that summer,
he met her at the station, and with his usual overflowing friendliness,
took her everywhere with him, introducing her to the street corners
where he sold papers, to his radical Catholic and non-Catholic friends.
Her little daughter had gone to a summer camp, so Paulina stayed with us
for six weeks, and when we were arrested the first time, for our civil
disobedience, and our bail was fixed at a thousand dollars each by Judge
Kaplan, she paid my bail and also told Eileen Fantino to use the money
she had given her for the summer camp for the children that year, to get
bail bonds for the three in her group.

She was with us that day we were arrested, helping us first to give out
leaflets, and then when the air raid signals began at two o'clock, she
took shelter nearby as the law required. She had a ten year old child to
think of. And then too, the fact that she was Theodore Roosevelt's
granddaughter, and the daughter of Alice Longworth, would make her very
conspicuous if she were arrested.

There was always something child-like and shy about Paulina but she was
valiant too, and though she could not speak up and shout **Catholic
Worker** with Ammon when she went out with him, she willingly stood with
him in the market place and held the paper up before her, while he did
the shouting.

One time an ardent socialist at Union Square tried to engage her in
debate, and she kept saying, "Go talk to Ammon." But he liked her broad,
sweet face, with its widely spaced blue eyes, set in dark lashes, and
kept trying to talk to her until Ammon came to the rescue.

She made a retreat with us that summer, at Maryfarm, the last one we had
there, given by Fr. Casey of St. Anastasia's Church, Hutchinson,
Minnesota. She slept in her station wagon out under the old apple tree
by the side of the house right under the dormitory window. I could look
down on her from my attic window. She spent most of her time reading,
and the retreat was in silence of course.

She stayed with us on Chrystie street for some weeks, before she went to
share an apartment with Carol Perry on a dingy East Side street near
Tompkins Square.

She loved to go into the room filled with knickknacks that Hatty and
Veronica have here at St. Joseph's house and where they serve coffee to
all and sundry. Veronica takes care of all the linens and blankets and
it is hard to keep her from doing the mending and pressing besides. Her
side of the room is filled with potted plants around a little shrine.
Hatty has an old curiousity shop and I'm always threatening to walk off
with the tiny vases and animals which cover the dresser and the
what-not. She does the curtains for every room in the house. So they are
always there, and for a shy person like Paulina, it was nice to go up
and sit with them and have coffee.

Veronica knew all about her, and was very thrilled to tell her about her
(Paulina's) fourth birthday, celebrated in the House, in Washington,
D.C., when Paulina's father was Speaker of the House. "I remember
reading the story, about how the governess brought you to the visitors'
gallery and when on hearing it was your birthday, the entire House rose
to its feet and clapped for you, you jumped up too and clapped as hard
as you could."

"Did I do that?" Paulina wondered. The papers had said so, Veronica
assured her.

The papers were not so kind at the time of her death last Monday. There
being a dirth of other news, the Mirror made a headline story and called
it a mystery death and said an autopsy had been ordered. She had been
found unconscious on the couch in her living room, on Sunday afternoon,
by her little ten year old daughter, who had called the neighbors, who
called an ambulance. She died not long after reaching the hospital,
whether from a blood clot or a failure of the heart, who knows? We had
seen her a few weeks ago when she came to New York to attend the little
play written by Kerran Dugan about "Aaron Heresy" and spent the evening
with us. She had worked in the Georgetown Hospital every morning as a
volunteer. She visited the Home for Incurables twice a week, and had
been there a few days before her death. There was one unhappy old
patient whom she had telephoned each day.

When I was returning from my trip to the South in October, I stopped in
Washington to spend the night with her, and the next day we had gone to
Llewellyn Scott's for lunch and spent the afternoon talking to him, and
going over his three houses of hospitality which he runs under the
blessing of Martin de Porres, the Negro lay brother of the Dominican
Order. Paulina brought men's clothes to Llewellyn and gave me a duffel
bag full of children's clothes to bring back on the bus.

We all loved her, and are deeply grieved by her death. Pete Asaro saw a
good deal of her and Carol that summer and the three of them helped us
move, using her station wagon, and an old one of ours. When ours broke
down during the next winter, she gave Charlie McCormack hers and we will
always think of her when we use it in the future. He went down to
Washington to pick it up last year and visited her little Georgetown
home where she and Joanna lived so happily. Ammon saw her again when he
picketed the White House December first appealing for an amnesty for
conscientious objectors who were in prison. And it was only three weeks
ago she was here to visit us.

We were all there at the Requiem Mass, Peter, Charlie, Ammon and I, in
the little Epiphany Church in Georgetown which could scarcely hold all
the people who came. The altar rails were banked with white blossoms,
cala lilies and chrysanthemums, and the coffin was draped with a blanket
of fine ferns. I had to hang on to my missal and the Little Office of
the Dead, keeping my mind on the beautiful words to keep from crying.

This winter Larry O'Donnell had died, and Dick Dwyer, benefactors too in
their way, with their painting and carpentering our house of
hospitality, and they were poor men who possessed nothing.

But the glorious requiem was the same for them all. "Eternal rest grant
unto them, O Lord, and let perpetual light shine upon them. May they
rest in peace."
