% On Pilgrimage - April 1957
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1957, 1, 6.

*Summary: A collection of stories: her daughter Tamar's search for a new
farm, the gift of looms, a book by Eric Fromm on community, labor and
civil rights picketing, her profession as a Benedictine oblate, and the
injustice of Morton Sobell's trial for espionage with the Rosenbergs.
(DDLW \#719).*

The crocuses are up late this year and Tamar was able to fence in the
little flower garden by the side of the kitchen door before the geese
got in to nip off all the buds. Instead, little Martha, year and a half
old, was the first one, and she picked the first yellow flower and
brought it to her mother. The gardens are full of all kinds of birds
now, and the sun is warmer, and you can almost feel the sap running in
the trees and shrubs.

Peter Maurin Farm
-----------------

This year we want to put in 500 asparagus, rhubarb and strawberry plants
and there will be a lot of work for our Saturday work crews to do. We
are still eating beets, carrots, string beans and tomatoes besides a
great variety of pickles from our garden.

We have been mightily blessed by God this Lent. We have a visitor from
Haiti, a Jesuit, who will stay for a few months, and is offering Mass
every day in our little chapel. Last Saturday it was a Mass in honor of
St. Dominic Savio, especially for the children, since the girls belong
to that club in their school. Father preached a long sermon on heaven
and hell, with many quotations from St. Thomas. We sang the Mass. Little
Clare, my godchild, the same age as my youngest grandchild, sang loudest
of all, holding a Kyriale upside down. John Filliger's greenhouse is
really green, full as it is of tomato and cabbage plants, and many
others too. He built the greenhouse himself from old windows that a
neighbor gave us and he works in it every day.

One spring-like afternoon John and Tamar and some of the children and I
set out upon a rural ride down Woodrow Road and visited a farm run by a
Russian couple for more than a score of years. They had two cows and a
bull, and a few hundred pigs, and many chickens, ducks, pigeons and in
the midst of these creatures, Martha could only see a squirrel and chase
that around. She cried over the pigs, they were so huge and fearsome.

Vermont
-------

"Another reason for moving to Vermont," Tamar said, remembering how the
others used to ride on the pigs' back and feed the baby goats and risk
the butting of the billygoat. The Hennessys are still writing to
friends, exploring real estate catalogues, wondering about jobs, and
planning to move in the late spring. First David wishes to take his
vacation early in order to explore the possibilities, while I baby-sit
with the seven children. He must have Tamar with him in this
exploration. Certainly they are used to country living, with their
experience at Maryfarm, Easton, and at Stotler's Crossroads, West
Virginia. Now with growing children, they have to be near a school, and
within walking distance preferably of town and work, church and school.

A lot to ask, of course, but St. Joseph will help. Something will open
up. A week ago when I was spending the weekend on the farm, Becky and
Susie came to spend the night, and Becky was telling me about the
Dominic Savio club, and how one little boy was going to be put out. He
was about eleven, but went around boasting of the movies he had seen,
and he especially preferred those on the condemned list, such as The
Moon Is Blue or Baby Doll. He had a collection (\$14 worth) of rock and
roll records, much to the horror of the sister who taught him. Between
television and movies, the country has become the city too, and it is
with no idea of escape that Tamar and David want Vermont. But they want
real country, not Staten Island, which is part of New York City, with
the greatest oil storage tanks of the Standard Oil within sight of their
upstairs windows, and the chemical works, refineries and other factories
polluting the air and the water from the Jersey Shore less than a mile
away. Staten Island itself remains country, backwash as it is of the
city, but the hum of industry can be heard out in the fields, and with a
west wind the smog is ugly indeed on the north side of the island.

Weather
-------

This winter the children had a scant two weeks of ice skating, and there
was little snow. There are few winter sports, and the weather varies
from mild and muggy to bitter cold. The littlest ones more often come in
wet to the skin, from wading in puddles and rivulets along the road.
Winter has its delights as we well know, and I recall the month of
January I spent in Minnesota and Montana a few years ago.

Meanwhile, to get to Vermont miracles are necessary. To sell the house
and four acres they have now, and to find a suitable house and job in
Vermont. That is the problem. If they could make the move first and sell
the house afterward! But they must have the money to make the move.

So Tamar lightens the tensions of indecision by spinning and weaving and
the cooking and washing that go with a big family. She now has curtains
for her windows, a bedspread, scarves and towels as a result of her
winter's work.

More Looms
----------

We were delighted during the month to receive the donation of two looms,
and a great spinning wheel from the Sisters of the Good Shepherd at
Peekskill. They had told me about them when I visited there some months
ago, the old sister had died who was using them, and they offered them
to us. Now we have two big and two small looms (two of them all set up)
on the farm, and the work goes on apace.

Eric Fromm
----------

One evening when I was visiting my sister, I picked up **The Sane
Society** by Eric Fromm, and was fascinated by it. There is a very good
chapter on the radical thinking of the last century and an analysis of
the thought of Marx, Proudhon, Kropotkin, Bakunin and Landauer and
others of that school. Mr. Fromm comes to the same conclusion that we
have, together with many others, that community is the only answer.
Peter Maurin started talking about the communitarian and personalist
revolution back in 1934; Mr. Fromm's is what he calls the humanist
communitarian society. His last chapter says that the only alternative
to insanity was the building up of community, but that it looked more
likely that we would have a war which would force civilization back to a
primitive agrarian society. I was surprised that neither Gandhi nor
Vinoba Bhave were listed in the index, or referred to as offering an
alternative to war by their teaching of non-violent resistance and
non-ownership.

Kohler Strike
-------------

We have had a good deal of correspondence over the Kohler strike, and
why Bob Steed, one of our editors, is picketing in front of the Kohler
show room one day a month, calling attention to the strike and the
boycott. Though in a way, a boycott is a use of force, a coercion, still
it remains a non-violent way to "make a point" when there is no
possibility of sitting down and coming to an agreement on issues over a
council table. It is perfectly legitimate to withdraw one's labor, and
one's purchasing of a product which comes from a plant where the "needs"
rather than "demands" of labor are not being met.

The issue is not really an economic one--it was not a question of wages
and hours and conditions of employment. The issue was always the rights
of the workers to belong to a union of their own choosing, and through
that union, to have some say in the management of the industry. I am not
even sure whether the latter issue ever came up, but every Catholic
economist now points out that to deproletarianize the worker, as Pope
Pius XI demanded in his encyclical Quadragesimo Anno, the worker would
have to become an owner. Not an owner by owning shares in the company,
but an owner having responsibility and share in the management.

From the first the struggle has been over labor management relations.
Both sides are determined to win, the United Auto Workers, CIO-AFL
throwing the weight of their great membership behind the strike, and
contributing gigantic amounts to the strike fund. It is said that they
have spent ten million dollars on this strike which involves only 3,000
workers. It is a fight over a principle. Those who complain that unions
have become monopolies, too great and powerful, fail to realize that
they have become monopolies in order to match strength with the
opponent. There is still a great job of organizing to be done throughout
the country. The DuPont workers have never been organized; the textile
workers though the south are unorganized. The workers in heavy industry
form only one part of the labor force of the country.

CORE
----

News comes to us that the Baltimore CORE (Committee on Racial Equality)
is actively picketing and conducting sit-ins at a chain of segregated
restaurants. One of our seminary friends writes that he was able to join
them on a free day a few weeks back. "They are magnificent and informed
people," he writes, "working from Gandhian principles, and have
excellent membership, including many ministers, doctors, teachers, etc.
among the colored of the city. The day I joined them on the picket line,
they were threatened with arrest, but it was only a threat."

Blanchet House of Hospitality
-----------------------------

News comes from the Portland, Oregon, Blanchet house of hospitality that
they had a fifth anniversary open house and had as guests Archbishop
Howard, and many priests, besides the interested laity. Fr. John Domin
who has been a friend of the house since his seminary days, and is a
beautiful calligrapher, if that is the word for it, designed the sign
for the house.

"Our giant stew pot sagged the stove and floor so badly we had to get
busy and prop up the floor from the basement with a '4 x 4'," Don
Broderick, director of the house wrote. "Some 1933 Chinese newspapers
and **Oregonians** of the same vintage were discovered under three
layers of linoleum and rugs in the course of cleaning and painting the
rooms at the house. We make a point of cleaning these rooms every 24
years," he added. How we would love to visit there again! Our friends
the Manions who used to have a few cigar stores in Portland, moved out
to the land some years ago and are living near the Mt. Angel Benedictine
Abbey, and they are our most regular correspondents from there.

Speaking of signs, we have a beautiful new sign over our doors at 223
Chrystie Street, with a flood light above it which shows up the beauty
of the wood carving. The work was a gift from a wonderful Italian wood
carver Henry Beretta who has done the statues for many churches, and has
given us this great gift for the love of God and brother.

Benedictine Oblate
------------------

I have mentioned a few visits in the past to St. Procopius Abbey at
Lisle, Ill. Our beloved Fr. Chrysostom Tarasevich is from there, and our
fellow worker Michael Kovalak was a seminarian there years ago. Peter
Maurin and Fr. Virgil Michel talked to me about Benedictinism during the
early years of the depression, and held up the Benedictine motto Pax,
and the balanced life of cult, culture and cultivation as a solution for
world troubles; the farming commune as a solution to the problems of
unemployment and automation.

Now I am a professed oblate of the St. Procopius family, and have been
for the last two years, which means that I am a part of the Benedictine
family all over the world, and a member of the Benedictine community at
Lisle and every month a news letter comes from St. Procopius, from the
pen of Fr. Richard, oblate master. My special love for St. Procopius is
because its special function is to pray for the reunion of Rome and the
Eastern Church. Their monks can offer Mass in the Eastern or Roman rite
and when Fr. Chrysostom came to give us retreats at Maryfarm, we sang
the liturgy of St. John Chrysostom. St. Procopius is also to be the
shrine of the Eastern saints in this country.

One specially interesting letter contained news of a new eastern
community which I had never heard of before.

The Studite monks of Woodstock, Ontario, have been placed under the
jurisdiction and authority of the Abbot of St. Procopius. "The Studite
monastic community was founded at the turn of the century by the
Metropolitan Archbishop Andrew Sheptitsky. The group follows the rule
and the ancient practices of St. Theodor of Studien which rule even
today is being observed by non-Catholic communities on Mt. Athos,
Greece.

"It was the desire of the Archbishop to reestablish a Catholic group to
follow the rule of this illustrious Catholic monk. The community had its
beginning with several illiterate swineherds. The Archbishop believed
that with these simple men he could find true obedience for a monastic
observance as was practiced in the early days of the Church.

"From these humble beginnings in 1900 the Community thrived and attained
its peak membership of 220 in 1939. Their greatness then was to be
tested, for through the Nazis and the Communists many of them suffered
glorious martyrdom while others went to Siberia. By 1945 there were but
14 remaining members.

"The type of life that was practiced in the community was that of a
purely contemplative nature as is revealed by the various states that
existed in the community. There were the penitents--the barefoot
ones--the fools for Christ--the fasters--the hermits. Their liturgical
functions entail an attendance of roughly eight to nine hours daily in
the chapel.

"After being dispossessed from the Ukraine they emigrated to Canada.
Right now they are penniless, in absolute poverty. But more even than
material relief they need paternal guidance and spiritual direction.

"The task of ministering to these monks is one in which our oblates can
share fully. Father Abbot has dedicated this work to our Blessed Mother.
I am sure we will all count it a privilege to have these holy men among
our confreres, since thus we have a real share in their merits."

Morton Sobell
-------------

I include this mention of Morton Sobell in my **On Pilgrimage** column
because I know that all those who read **The Catholic Worker** read the
columns when perhaps they might glance over a news story and evade it,
not consciously but because that is the way people read newspapers.

Helen Sobell came in to see us--it was her second visit in the last six
months--and talked to us about her husband. At my request, she gave me
the eight little paperbound volumes of the transcript of the trial.

Anyone who can read Erle Stanley Gardner's mysteries, where the
unravelling of the plot takes place usually in the court room, would
follow the story of the Rosenbergs and the Sobells with fascinated
interest. That is, if they will only read them. I imagine they could get
them at a library if they could not afford to buy them (they cost six
dollars). I am reading them now, and I am in the third volume, and for
the sake of our readers who will not have access to these reports, I
will try to give my impression, sketchy though this mention may be. But
I will continue some mention of this case from month to month.

First of all, I was surprised at the indictment under which the
Rosenbergs, David Greenglass and Morton Sobell were tried. There was no
mention in the first two indictments of any overt act on the part of
Sobell, and it was only by going to court and after ceaseless pleas that
there was any particular charge.

In the calling of the jury, I was surprised at how many prospective
jurors said forthrightly that they were opposed to capital punishment.
Thank God! So far this voice of the people has not been heard.

It is too late for the Rosenbergs, though we owe it to the children they
left behind them, to re-examine the case. All three were tried together
so we have to do this in reviewing the case of Morton Sobell who is
serving thirty years at Alcatraz. We are reviewing it in the hope that
there will be enough expression of opinion so that there will be new
hearings and a new trial. Or at least that he will be transferred from
the West Coast nearer to his wife and children.

According to Harold Urey, physicist and Nobel prize winner "The
integrity of justice as it is administered in the United states is at
stake . . . Mr. Sobell was not properly tried and the verdict and
sentence are not justified."

The most recent action taken was before the United States Court of
Appeals on March 5. Dr. Sanchez Ponton, formerly Minister of Education
of Mexico, now senior professor of law at the University of Mexico, came
from Mexico City and presented arguments charging the knowing use of
perjured testimony against Morton Sobell and the violation of the
extradition treaty between the United States and Mexico.

There is no decision as yet as to whether another hearing will be
granted.

Any one who wishes to get more material about this case can write to the
**Sobell Committee, 940 Broadway, New York City.** As for me, I feel
convinced that Morton Sobell was judged guilty even before he was tried,
that the trial was not a fair one, and that we too must join our voices
in a continued protest against a terrible injustice that has been done.

Two years ago I wrote to Commissioner of Prisons Bennett and added my
petition to the hundreds of others for a new trial, or at least that
Sobell be transferred to an eastern prison so that his wife and two
children can see him. The letter I received in reply thanking me for the
tone of my letter, which was not antagonistic, was anything but
pleasant. Mr. Bennett assured me that Mrs. Sobell somehow managed to get
out to see her husband, even though they are a continent apart, and that
he himself did not think the two children should see their father.

Helen Sobell told me of their last visit, when she brought their
eight-year-old son with her, her first visit in four months, and the
child's in four years. The father and son talked of the child's erector
set and his toy trains, the wife and husband talked of Fromm's latest
book, **The Art of Loving,** discussing father love, and mother love,
and all the talk had to be through a heavy plate glass barrier, with the
use of earphones. The agony of such intercourse!

"God sees the truth but waits." He waits on us to open our eyes and ears
to justice and charity. Let us be part of His justice, "whose property
it is always to have mercy and to spare."
