% On Pilgrimage - July/August 1958
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1958, 1, 2, 7, 8.

*Summary: Delights in the refreshing mornings for study and prayer at
their beach houses on Staten Island, in spite of noisy children in the
evening. Observes that many priests disapprove of Ammon Henacy's long
fasts for peace. Suggests that the modest an prudent keep their work
going more than the extremists they often attract. (DDLW \#741).*

This last six weeks I have spent a good deal of time with children,
since our latest "proyect" as Hans calls it, is a couple of bungalows on
the beach where not only children and their mothers can come for some of
the refreshment, light and peace we ought to have on this side of the
grave, but where some of our fatigued fellow workers can come for rest.
It is wonderful to hear the lapping of the waves and the cry of the
gulls on the beach, to smell the acrid odor of the privet hedge in
bloom, and the sweet clover drying on the window sill, the seaweed and
salt air,--an indescribable mixture of odors. There have been no storms
as yet, and no particularly high tides, but Stanley is looking forward
to equinoctial storms with all the flotsam and jetsam of the beach. And
he is beginning to dream about a houseboat to be anchored in our little
harbor.
 
We are near enough to the farm for visits back and forth, and Hans has
been putting in a staircase to the attic and repairing here and there,
and Mike has been watching over plumbing, electricity and grass cutting.
But now we are pretty much on our own. When we go to the farm for a
meal, and the four and five-year-olds start chasing chickens, the older
ones on the farm rejoice that we are not staying longer. They have
week-end guests camping on the hill in back of the woods,--Pat Maloney
and some of the boys he has found in his wanderings around New York. He
started with six each weekend,--last week it had increased to 14, some
of whom he had to send home early, and now let us hope there will be a
happy mean.
 
All is not beer and skittles, as my mother used to say, meaning that
life is not all pleasant sounds --our slum children can't get to sleep
before midnight.
 
It is quietest and most beautiful in the early morning when there are a
few hours when one can read and study. Sometimes when I hear the
wailings from our little Maryhouse, (I am sleeping in Nazareth, the
second bungalow, which acts as a buffer between Maryhouse, which is
turbulent, and the quiet neighbors on our other side), I think, "Is this
an image of life, getting harder and harder as the day passes, and
ending in the deadly fatigue that all mothers of large families know at
the end of the day?"
 
Last night one of the children howled desperately all evening, it
seemed, about everything. Everything was contrary to it,--mother,
brother and sister. Silence did not descend on us until almost twelve
when the two little Puerto Rican families closed the door facing
Nazareth and the windows, and the sound was kept in. 
 
But the mornings! The joyful mornings, the wonderful beginnings again.
Every morning is a resurrection.

The book which I have enjoyed these quiet mornings was Bouyer's
iturgical Piety. On Page 119, he writes, "to eat is a sacred action for
man because it is like being created anew, since all life comes from
God."
 
This rings so true to women who are the nourishers of the race. Built
from her flesh in the womb, nourished from her breast, man receives as
it were a thanksgiving from the woman, who originally came from his
flesh, which in turn was created out of nothing by God. 
 
And in work like that of **The Catholic Worker** hospices, where there
are breadlines as well as meals for all those living in our houses--
over a hundred people here in the New York area, so much time is giving
to raising, buying and preparing food. What cooperators those who work
in the kitchen these hot summer days!
 
And here in this issue we have the story of Ammon's fasting for forty
days, like the fathers of the desert and the prophets of Israel and as
so many of the peoples in the world do today, perforce. There are still
famines in the world, still people dying of starvation, while we feast
on the abundance that America has to offer. Even the poor feast from
their small wages, in their deplorable housing, because they feel that
here at least, there is one appetite they can satisfy and . there is
never enough money to do much with. It is always feast or famine with
them.
 
In a way Ammon's fast reminds us that man does not live on bread alone,
that he can go for long periods on very scant rations; that with the
grace of God, he can live as Daniel and the three youths in Babylon did,
on grain and beans and water. If he has the will to do it! If there is
some reason for doing it! Devotion to a cause, to an ideal of peace,
makes it easy for Ammon. He is a John the Baptist calling attention to
the urgency of the day.-- that we need to wake and use the means called
for by Our Lady of Fatima, to bring peace to the world. What touched me
extremely in the story of Fatima was the immediate response of the three
little children, who for penance began to share their meager lunch of
bread, to give it away to those poorer than they, and to fast. Prayer
and fasting always have gone together. Our Lady called for prayer and
penance, but we do not see much of it yet.
 
So Ammon goes to an extreme! Our own dear priests at old St. Patrick's
responded with the utmost sympathy and promised their prayers and the
Trappists in Georgia and Virginia prayed daily for him. Ammon said that
he knew it was prayers and not just his own will that kept him going.
 
But other priests, of course were not so sympathetic. They met him
coldly, and expressed their disapproval of such extreme action. They
distrust, and too often rightly, the extreme. There is a story told
about St. Dominic, that the devil boasted that he would tempt his order
of preachers by gluttony on the one hand and fasting on the other, so
that Dominic made it a point to urge his followers to keep to an even
mean.
 
I can understand these priests and their reaction. We too see many who
come to work with us who are the extremists, who fall away at the heat
of the day, while the modest, the prudent, the fearful keep going,
advancing little by little and so keep the work going. 
 
At the same time these priests do not know Ammon who should not be
judged by the tone of his writings, or even by some of the things he
says, taken out of context. He is offering his life for his brothers and
he has to prove it constantly, to himself and to others. Rightly, in
this great work, he calls to pacifists to show they are ready to lay
down their lives -- to live differently, to embrace poverty, to reject
the fruits of injustice, to do with less, so that others can have more,
in order to make a beginning of peace now. How many things we should do
without, we **can** do without. Our own examinations of conscience can
tell us these things. We sin against our vocation to holy poverty, in
many little ways.
 
And how many things children want from morning till night. Their
desires are limitless. Working with children you can see how parents
through their very love try to make up to their children by gifts and
sense pleasures for what they find it so impossible to give them these
days,--real training.
 
Living in community you come back over and over to the conclusion that
the emphasis must he placed first on the personalist. "Seek ye first the
kingdom of heaven." Discipline your own life, grow in grace, and your
children will do what you do, rather than what you say. There is no
telling them. They must see and learn for themselves.
 
All these reflections make me treasure these early morning times of
study. Even Holy Mass and communion are not enough, when one rushes in
and out of church, as we rush to and from our work.
 
All this is talking to myself of course. I am the one who needs these
countless reminders.
 
Hans
---
While Hans was building the stairs and putting up gutters on the roof
and doing various other jobs before he got sick, we had good
conversation at table. The children were talking of the dangers of
floating out to sea on the inflated inner tubes, and he told of his
shipwreck in the Gulf of Mexico many years ago. The ship was the North
Star and it was a lumber ship -- a three-masted schooner from Boston or
Maine. She had a little donkey boiler which hoisted the sail, a little
bit easier on the crew of fourteen who sailed her. She was carrying
telegraph poles, wired to the deck and three days out from New Orleans,
a hurricane struck and the ship broke in two. The captain asked for
volunteers to unwire the lumber but none could make it: It was sure
death. They took to the boats, Hans in the captain's and with the help
of sail, the seven of them made Veracruz in a week. They had only a cask
of water and sea biscuit and a bottle of brandy for medicine. The other
boat was picked up by a freighter. The American consul in Veracruz saw
to it that they got some clothing, (Hans was in singlet and dungarees)
and paid their fare to New Orleans but there they were on the beach
while they fought with the company for their pay. When they got it was
three day's pay, the amount coming to them for their three days on the
boat before it cracked up. "There was no union in those days," Hans
said.
 
\*\*\*
---
 
We call attention to Robt. Casey's story in this issue of the strike in
Hawaii and the communal work engaged in by the strikers.
We omitted to give Irene Mary Naughton's address in the last issue of
the Catholic Worker which printed her letter from Yucatan. They need
help there and I beg our readers to send what they can. Everyone can
spare a little. Even the apostles who followed Our Lord had a money bag
from which they gave alms, and He had so embraced poverty that He had no
place to lay His head. It was our Lord too who told the story of the
widow's mite. Peter Maurin used to say, "If everyone tried to be the
poorest, none would be poor." And one of my Spanish in-laws always said.
"There is always enough for one more,--everyone take a little less." So
send what you can to Irene Naughton, Calle 15 de Sept. 22, Chetumal,
Quin. Roo, Mexico.

