% Fall Appeal - October 1958
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1958, 2.

*Summary: Begs for help "with this wild adventure of the works of
mercy." Protests the state's appropriation of private property and its
"ownership of the indigent." (DDLW \#745).*

Feast of the Guardian Angels. 1958
 
 Dear fellow workers in Christ,
 
It is strange and wonderful how God makes us live out our ideas. He
takes us at our word. Do you mean what you say? Do you love Me? Then
shelter the harborless, feed the hungry, clothe the naked, give drink to
the thirsty, visit the sick, bury the dead, visit the prisoner. You are
doing it to Me. We started doing this very personally when Peter Maurin
our founder used to teach us and discuss these things with us. We were
getting out a paper, THE CATHOLIC WORKER, which was dedicated to the
personalist and communitarian approach but we lived in poverty in a
store front and on the street and people came to us very directly for
their immediate needs. I remember one man coming in who wanted nothing
so much as to bathe his hot tired feet and he didn't seem much amazed
when one of the editors got him a tub of water. We didn't go so far as
to bathe them, tho this too, Jesus told us to do. That might have
embarrassed him. They come in the same way today, for a razor, a chance
to clean up, a pair of shoes, pants, shirt. And the women with their
shopping bags, out of which they seem to live! (The butcher just called
for our order and it's 25 pounds of chopped meat today.) Our bills seem
enormous but then counting the coffee line and the soup line and the
house and the extra ladies from the Salvation Army on Rivington street,
who sleep there and eat here, we estimate about 112,500 meals have been
served since we sent out our March appeal. The Holy Father says never to
worry about running up bills for the poor. So this appeal is to help us
catch up on the bills, and catch our breath to go on with this wild
adventure of the works of mercy, in which we come in conflict with City
and State who have come to believe in State ownership of the indigent.
And State ownership of private property too!

The only way we can show our love for God is by our love for our
brothers. It is obeying the law of God to do these things. He has
blessed us with friends, our readers, who have over the years sent us
enough gifts to buy this house we are living in and repair it for the
use of our big family. Almost sixty thousand dollars was put into this
house. And now we find we must be upholders of the right of private
property and to protest that the city and the state, all over the
country, are ruthlessly confiscating, dispossessing, and driving people
into worse slums and more crowded conditions. Delinquency is increased
by these dislocations, old people are dying of sorrow, literally. Even
the dead are disturbed. One cemetery in Westchester was ruthlessly
ploughed up by a bulldozer and the bones scattered. There is no
reverence for home, for the family, for the bodies of the dead. And we
must protest. Our property has passed into the hands of the city. We
must employ lawyers to receive payment for it.

We have no money to buy another house although our lawyer advises us we
can borrow from the city at six percent interest. But they do not permit
us to buy because they have put us in the class of hotel or
roominghouse, with transients whereas eighty percent of the house is
permanent population remaining with us some years.

We have seen several houses which we could use and repair if we could
get our classification changed. We are not hopeless. Everyone who comes
to us has a guardian angel and so have houses, and we firmly believe
that the powers of the spirit will prevail, that God is with us and who
can be against us. And this is also the month of the joyful St. Francis,
and of St. Therese who thought this present life so important that she
promised she would spend her heaven doing good upon earth. So in their
name, we beg your help, to pay our bills and keep going.

In His love,  
Dorothy Day
