% Articles on Work
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, from September 1946 to March 1947.

*Summary:* A series of articles on work from *The Catholic Worker* during
a period of rapid industrial growth shortly after the end of World War
II. (DDLW \#751).

[**"The Church and Work"**](daytext.cfm?TextID=154) (DOC \#154)-
September 1946

> Discusses in length the modern industrial problem of the machine and
> its relation to factory, land and worker. Explains the C.W.'s attempt
> to gain the workers back to Christ, by explicating a philosophy of
> work that distinguishes between those machines that are the extended
> hand of man and those that make man the extended hand of the machine.
> Such a philosophy sees people as cooperating with their creator, and
> to labor is to pray. Criticizes American Catholics for not applying
> Papal teaching to the work area and shows a particular acrimony to a
> priest who tell workers to sanctify their surroundings instead of
> changing it.

[**"Reflections on Work - November 1946"**](daytext.cfm?TextID=227) (DOC
\#227)

> Emphasizes learning to work with crafts and trades to counter the
> evils of industrialism--to acquire a philosophy of work. Complains
> that clergy are too easily "bribed" by business and lauds the work of
> the French worker priests.

[**"Reflections on Work - December 1946"**](daytext.cfm?TextID=229) (DOC
\#229)

> Reports on the hard life and work of the coal miners of Western
> Pennsylvania and the strike demands of John L. Lewis. "We want to
> change man's work; we want to make people question their work; is it
> on the way to heaven or hell?" Emphasizes the holiness of work and the
> sacramental quality of property.

[**"Reflections On Work - January 1947"**](daytext.cfm?TextID=431) (DOC
\#431)

> Quotes Peter Maurin's account of the work of Leon Harmel whose
> exemplary industrial organization inspired Pope Leo XIII. Praises the
> Quebec governments homesteading policies. Repeats the need for a
> philosophy of work and the ideal of the village community. Keywords:
> distributism, industrialism.

[**"Reflections On Work - March 1947"**](daytext.cfm?TextID=452) (DOC
\#452)

> Focuses on worker ownership and calls for workers to fight for the
> means of production, to shun working for the war effort, for priests
> to come out of their rectories to help the poor, and for all to start
> the struggle for reform of the social order and against charity
> growing cold. Repeats the need to be one with the poor and to resist
> the present social order.
