% On Pilgrimage - December 1959
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1959, 2, 6.

*Summary: Tells of George Clements whose skeleton was found in the woods
near Peter Maurin Farm. Paints a picture of the natural surroundings at
the beach house. Describes the men's house in the city, wishing they had
yellow paint for the walls. Answers critics who say they have a "morbid
preoccupation with misery." (DDLW \#759).*

The day before we went to press last month, Beth Rogers called me from
the farm and said that the body of a man had been found in the woods
about a half a mile from the Peter Maurin Farm. It had been lying there
for so long that it was just bones. The police had called the farm
because we had reported George Clements as missing last March. Beth and
Charles identified the clothes on the body, and it was taken to the
morgue at the Farm Colony, in the center of the island, before the
coroner had a chance to examine it to find whether the body was of a
hunchbacked man, as George was. But it was George, as we knew from the
clothes, even from the special shirt that Tommy Hughes had given him
because he himself had outgrown it. If it had just been a matter of the
clothes which came into our clothes room and which to a large extent
outfits us all, -- we could not be sure. But Tommy knew his shirt. In
the absence of any known relatives, the body was turned over to us, and
George was buried, with Fr. Campbell, our pastor, offering Mass at which
all the farm group attended, including Bob, and three of the men from
St. Joseph's Loft in town. He was buried in St. Joseph's Cemetery on a
little hill in back of the church, and he lies beside Chad and Charlie
Smith, Philip Millions, little Catherine, and Mr. Stokes. It is here
that we are going to have Peter Maurin's body rest, and the undertaker
will attend to the matter as soon as possible. It will be good to have
him near us near the farm, in the midst of the family, instead of away
over in St. John's Cemetery in Brooklyn.

George Clements became interested in **The Catholic Worker** when he
lived on Skid Row in San Francisco on welfare, and attended a meeting at
which I spoke at St. Boniface Church, which he attended. He was so
fascinated by the work that he wandered around among his friends, among
whom were priests, and collected enough money to take the bus to New
York. We were surprised, of course, to see him arrive, but not at all
surprised when he found the CW not at all the Utopia he had expected. He
stayed for some months, and was able to make enough friends, and write
to enough friends in California to get the bus fare back again to San
Francisco. But nostalgia for Mott Street drew him back, and in another
six months he was back again, bag and baggage, this time to remain. I
cannot remember whether it was fifteen or twenty years he was with us,
getting older, quieter, more bent than ever. Probably his most animated
moment was when Kieran Dugan chose him to act Santa Claus in the
Christmas play he put on two years ago, called **The Trial of Aaron
Heresy**. Many in the house acted in the gay little skit, which drew
people together in hours of practice down in the basement of Chrystie
Street. Kieran's verses were sung to the popular tunes of a current
Broadway musical, and everyone enjoyed the frivolity.

Last January, when we were evicted from Chrystie Street, Slim and Molly
and California George, as they called him, were moved down to the farm.
They all settled down nicely and neither Slim nor George seemed to be
disturbed by the move. Except that George kept writing to friends in San
Francisco, asking for money to go back. So many years had passed that
most of the letters were returned to him as **Not Found**, or
**Deceased**. Once in a while, he took a walk in the woods, but he was
last seen, according to report, in front of the post office in Pleasant
Plains.

When the police could find no trace of him through the Missing Persons
Bureau, we began to think that by some miracle, some friends of George
had gotten the money together to send him back to California. He was
always secretive. People who are forced to live in community often take
pains to have a private life of their own, outside of it. (An indication
of the kind of community we are, of people forced to live together by
physical need. We talk of the need for community, intentional, voluntary
community, but in spite of a history of houses of hospitality and farms,
we have never yet achieved it. We talk so much of the use of force, the
collective and cooperative farms in Russia having been achieved by
force, but we must remember the force of dire need that has brought
about our own. But there are other communities to be studied, those in
Israel, those of the Bruderhof and other religious communities.)

It was a grave shock to us all to find that George had wandered off like
a sick animal to die, covered over with leaves, hidden from the road,
merging with the earth, overlooked by the mushroom hunters who scour the
woods spring and fall, and finally found by a school boy playing in the
woods one Sunday afternoon.

Works of Mercy
--------------

During the course of the month, there was a great deal of visiting the
sick, including Fr. Elias in Bellevue with a broken leg, and Richard
Nixon in the psychiatric ward. Bob always says when he returns from
visiting there that it is more peaceful than Spring Street. That is
because, he being in charge, there are so many calls made on him, and so
many of them impossible to fulfill. When one is in charge of the funds,
there are ceaseless requests for carfare to apply for jobs, to get to
jobs, to keep going until first pay, for week's rent, for month's rent
-- from people made brazen by the ceaseless blows of illness and
unemployment, and the scorn of others that makes it more bitter; and
from people who do not call upon you until too late, until they are
evicted, and then there is the added trouble of finding shelter, finding
relief. We have to always remember that we are stewards, that we are not
dispensing what is our own, except our time, our love, our patience.
Once during the month, we learned that we were overdrawn at the bank by
a hundred dollars. We did not send out an October appeal as we usually
do, because we have money coming to us from the city for the Chrystie
Street house, and we do not like to appeal for help until our resources
are really exhausted.

The Police
----------

As usual, the works of mercy become dangerous. One night, the food being
exhausted and all fed that the loft could hold, Hugh Madden, our
rancher-seaman, locked the doors downstairs, whereupon a crowd formed of
those who were still coming. One of the neighbors called the police, and
the squad car pulled up, and more people gathered. It is always hard to
explain what we are doing. Why should individuals feed the hungry? Why
are we not under the shelter of the Catholic charities? Are we an
approved group? Have we a license to run a dining room?

Moreover, it is hard for those not involved to believe that people are
really hungry, that there is really human misery in this great and
prosperous city, or any other city in the United States. It is indecent
to talk about it, to write about it. It is in bad taste. We are
"necrophiliacs" as one critic put it; and others say we have a morbid
preoccupation with misery. I would say rather we have a vocation to
**work** along these lines.

Every hour on the hour news comes over the radio of all the human
disasters that have occurred during the day and this account is repeated
over and over, with occasional new bits of tragedy added.

The newspapers are better because there one can find relief in feature
articles, book reviews, interviews with men of note. But on the radio,
the stress is all on tragedy, sudden death on the highway, murder by
juvenile delinquents, thefts, robberies, airplane tragedies, people
burned to death, homes destroyed, floods, earthquakes, hurricanes, and
people sit in their snug homes and survey the world through the windows
of television.

One of the early Fathers of the Church, St. Jerome or St. Basil, writing
to console a friend on the loss of a wife, said, "What if you could
stand on a high mountain and look out over the entire world and see the
torrent of tears shed?" But we are doing that now, when we listen to the
radio and watch television, and we become strangely callous. "What has
that to do with me? Let the State take care of it."

On the Beach
------------

It is cold now on the beach, and one must bundle up to go out and pick
up driftwood, to fill the stoves in our two beach houses. They are in
the process of being "winterized" but there is a strong wind, and it
sweeps under the house and makes the floors cold. It is comfortable
working at manual tasks, but when it comes to sitting down to a
typewriter, it is a cold job. Thanksgiving day, there was a new moon,
and the tide went away out, and revealed mud flats covered with green
seaweed, with gulls white against the rocks. Little flocks of grebes
swam in the deeper water, and dived and disappeared, feasting on the
bottom. The gulls content themselves with the garbage dumps over on the
other end of the island where the city is filling in the beautiful
marshes for an ugly highway, so they only play at fishing, diving to the
surface of the water, two or three after some morsel, their shrill cries
filling the quiet beach. The wind was off shore so there was no sound of
waves.

On Thanksgiving night, after a delightful day at Peter Maurin Farm, Anne
Marie Stokes and I walked down the road, through the woods to the
station and went into New York. Doing without cars on the farm has meant
more staying at home, and more walking when we go out. The walk to the
beach must be about five miles and Stanley can make it in an hour. Those
not used to it can take the train between Pleasant Plains and Annadale
and walk down from there, and both walks are along roads where there is
little traffic, and beautiful woods. Jimmie Hughes commented on how much
he saw when he was walking, and one delight for the eyes were great
patches of bitter sweet among the brambles, and lovely yellow rushes in
the swamps.

The ride on the train takes a half an hour, and the ferry almost that,
and there are always families returning from visits to relatives, with
branches of leaves or cuttings of plants, now that there are no longer
any flowers. Anne Marie had gathered herself a yellow bouquet of seed
pods of various grasses growing by the edges of the fields. John had
ploughed practically everything and put in rye, some of which was up in
great checkerboards of brightest green, contrasting beautifully with the
brown of freshly turned and harrowed earth. One had to look for weeds,
and Anne Marie was loathe to leave them behind, but Hans had given her a
great loaf of raisin bread, true feastday bread, and what with other
bundles, she had to abandon the weeds on the top of our piano. John also
had ready for us some cuttings from the fig tree which is now blanketed
in hay and burlap against the winter. I had brought that cutting,
purchased for fifty cents in a tomato can from a curb peddler on my way
to church on Mott Street ten years before, and transplanted it to Peter
Maurin Farm, and it has borne almost a peck of figs, even a bushel, each
of these last three years. We could not carry the cuttings either, but
John promised to water them for us, and we will collect them another
time; Anne Marie for her roof, and me for the garden in back of the
beach house where I have already put in a fine row of chrysanthemums
this fall.

One appreciates the country all the more when forced to go in and out of
town. People laugh when we say the country, because Staten Island is
still New York City.

Books I'm reading . . .? "Desert Callings" by Anne Fremantle, books and
magazine articles about Algeria and the Sahara, Peace News accounts of
the projected caravan into the Sahara by Michael Randle, Francis Hoyland
of England, and Michael Scott (whom we always associate with South
Africa) and Bayard Rustin and others. The Direct Action Committee in
England spearheads this venture into the Sahara to protest bomb tests on
a territory which is rich in oases and populated by at least 20,000
people. The White Fathers by Glenn Kittler which tells of the terrible
hardships endured and the massacre of many of the priests who first
tried to penetrate the desert. Another book on Africa by Alphoeus
Hunton, published by International Publishers, is rich in statistics and
reliable as to history, written as it is by a man educated at Howard,
and at present teaching there, with degrees from Columbia and other
colleges. But it is onesided, too, and whole areas of history are
neglected.

Whether or not men have faith, they cannot ignore the facts of history,
that other men have lived and died side by side with them in their
desire to educate and do justice as well as show love for their
brothers. The same is true of the religious minded. They work along
spiritual lines, trying to grow in the spiritual life, deepen their life
of prayer, and too often, the active work of building a new earth
wherein justice dwelleth is ignored. We are not just souls, we are
bodies, and those poor bodies of desert folk are already suffering as
expellees, refugees, homeless, transplanted, suffering once again from
the dominating empire building whites who always take first place at
table, the best of land, and to whom it has never occurred that they
should wash the feet of their brothers as our Lord showed them to do.

Meeting
-------

The night after Thanksgiving, I sat in our large loft and listened to
the speakers, one of them Karl Meyer, just released the day before from
the Federal prison in Pennsylvania, visiting us and his home in Vermont
for a few days before he returns to work in the Chicago House of
Hospitality; and Ed Egan, teaching at Mt. Mercy College in Pittsburgh
and home for a few days' vacation.

This is not to report the meeting, but to give an impression of St.
Joseph's Loft to make our faraway readers acquainted with it. John
Cogley used to call attention to the glaring unshaded electric
lightbulbs, truly ugly. We need shades, what kind I do not know. The
walls and ceiling are glaring white, and when I commented on its
ugliness to Bob Steed, he said in great surprise, "Why, they were just
painted last July!" A warm yellow to make the room look brighter might
be better. How many times I have longed for people with decided tastes
to come in and say, "We are here to clean, to paint, and this is what we
are going to do!" People are too diffident. People around the CW are too
harassed by human needs to accept the help that is available, or to go
out and look for it. Also, too many start projects and never finish
them. Or do them once, as though to show how, and then do not follow
them up. It is a miracle how things **do** get done, however, in the
chaotic anarchism which is the Catholic Worker. The lower half of the
walls are about the ugliest green I have ever seen; it is supposed to be
bright, and also not to show the dirt! I would rather show the dirt, and
so see the need to attack it. Once I asked that my bedroom floor be
painted a bright yellow, over on Mott Street, and the request raised a
furore. If one of the girls had not stood up for my rights to have the
floor the color I wanted, it would have been the dark red the men deemed
fitting for floors. The yellow reminded me of Mexico on the one hand,
and an old New England farmhouse on the other. Our floors at the loft
are good, hardwood floors, unpainted, and if they were, Hugh would soon
have the paint scrubbed off. Thanks to him, however, they were good and
clean that night of the meeting. There were about fifty at the meeting,
and there was plenty of room. Two long tables were set up with cups for
the coffee and sassafras tea which Jonas had already prepared. He sat at
the end of the kitchen drinking his own tea out of a huge bowl and made
us all thirsty. We faced the rear wall on which hangs a four-foot
crucifix, black wood and black corpus, which someone brought in and
wanted hanging in a room where the poor were served. To one side on top
of some shelves there is a statue of St. Joseph, lily in hand, made of
white china, and a replica of the one in Montreal at the shrine. Some
attempt was made to back it against the white wall with a contrasting
color, and there was a yellow chrysanthemum in front of him. But someone
had tucked cornflake boxes to one side, as usual, and behind the statue,
as though he were guarding them, were a pair of socks and a muffler.
What we need are lockers so that men can have some sense of privacy and
security. John Pohl had his little radio stolen, and since he loved
classical music, this is a great loss. He can no longer hear WNYC or
WQXR. If anyone has a radio to spare, please bring it and give it to
John Pohl, no one else! On the other side of the door which leads into
the clothes room for men, and which in turn leads into Keith's room
where he has the addressograph, hangs Mike Sollito's wire shopping
basket on wheels which he pulls down to the fish market on Fulton Street
for swordfish tails each Friday. "What kind of fish are you going to get
today," Larry always asks, and Mike always replies, "Dead fish." On the
wall hangs a beautiful copy of St. Michael, made by a friend of Mary
Roberts who copied it from a statue in the Cloisters. On the left wall
there are Mary Whalen's and Fritz Eichenberg's drawings which face me
when I am sitting at table. They do not stand out well against the blank
white wall, unframed as they are.

All this is by way of being a hint to the work group of the Walter
Farrell guild, or to one or another of the work camps to come and give
us a hand at refurbishing the place for Christmas. But remember, it is
**yellow** walls I want, not white; perhaps nothing can be done with
that bright grass green below. Jack English, before he became a Trappist
priest, electrified us all with his chartreuse and coral kitchen on
Chrystie Street. That is what we need, a little cheerful imagination,
plus clean windows, and perhaps curtains of striped denim.

And while I surveyed the soiled dishtowels hanging in front of St.
Joseph who probably noticed such things as little as Charlie
Butterworth, Ammon Hennacy or Bob Steed, Ed Egan went on talking about
people capable of making value judgments, the difference between
relativism and subjectivity, and intuitive personal certitude.

We have not yet begun to think of Christmas, but since this is the
December issue, I will wish you all a very happy, holy season.

Let the heavens rejoice and let the earth be glad, before the face of
the Lord; because He cometh!
