% Eviction--Suffering
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, November 1060, 1, 8.

*Summary: Notes the sufferings of victims of urban renewal and is
cynical of those who benefit. (DDLW \#773).*

We used to say that New York was made up of a series of villages, each
with their charm and culture and a certain richness of life in spite of
poverty. Harry Golden's books are filled with the joy of the old East
Side, as well as with the story of poverty and struggle. But the
villages are being torn down now and the Roosevelt site is the latest
scene of tragedy, where 169 families are still left in the neighborhood
with no houses available for them.

"It was mass hysteria," Juliana Delkus told us, speaking of a meeting at
St. Stanislaus church where meetings are being held In the school hall
to protest the ruthlessness of this displacement. The Lower East Side
Neighborhood Association is sponsoring the protests that are being made
and trying to get an extension of time for the tenants who have not
found a place to go.

"Many of these people have their old parents with them, and if they went
into a project they would not be allowed to keep them. And if they do
not get a place which is approved by the housing authority with a window
in every room and heat and a private bath, they won't get the bonus paid
to each family for getting out quick and finding their own place."

Juliana is one of the tenants in the neighborhood who will have to move,
and she has been helping the others by going from door to door and
getting signatures on petitions.

"I am not even trying to find a place yet," she said. "I want to help
the others. The housing authority officer offered me an apartment which
he said be would pay \$200 for, and said the rent would be eighty
dollars a month. I told him I could not take it. He said, 'What? You
can't even pay eighty dollars a month?' What poor person can pay eighty
dollars a month, I want to know."

When asked if any of the tenants evicted could move into the new
project, Juliana said she had heard that it was to be a cooperative
house and besides the initial cost, the upkeep would be \$28.50 a room.
Ground was to be broken for the new project on Fifth street between
First Avenue and Avenue A on December 8, she said. She called attention
to the fact that on another street where all the families were evicted,
the houses were boarded up and work was not started for five years.
Anyone walking through the East Side will see hundreds of buildings
boarded up which could be improved enough for temporary dwellings while
slums are being eliminated and better housing provided.

In my column this month I call attention to the generosity of the City
in trying to reimburse and recompense owners and tenants but here I am
pointing out to amend what I said that the old adage works always,
''Them as has, gits." It is so old a proverb that Our Lord used it,
turning it to spiritual goods, saying that "To him that has much, much
is given, and to him that has little, even that it taken away."
