% On Pilgrimage - July/August 1962
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, July-August 1962, 2, 3.

*Summary: Mentions her travails in getting a new book about the Catholic
Worker movement, *Loaves and Fishes*, ready for the publisher.
Disapproves of the attitudes and behavior of "a group of beats" who came
and went, especially their sexual behavior and disrespect for the body.
Hopes to travel to Brazil and Cuba. Recommends reading Chekhov and
numerous other books. (DDLW \#792).*

My New Book--the work on which has kept me from my other writing (except
some letters)--is out of my hands, aside from reading the galley proofs.
At least it is finished if I can keep out of the way of the particular
editor to whom I have been assigned. I had thought all the work was
done, the work accepted, the contract signed, and "just a few little
odds and ends, loose ends, to be attended to." Ed Sammis was the editor
Harpers assigned me to. He broke it to me gently. A few additional
paragraphs here and there. And then he began to question me. "Who was
Peter Maurin and what did he look like, more details about him. You make
Ammon Hennacy come alive but not Peter." I'd have to do a few additional
chapters! Of course I was glad to have this direction. It was good to
have an editor who knew nothing about the beginnings of our work, who
could draw from me all those details needed to make our work, its
beginnings and its continuance understandable. So I worked steadily for
months on the revision. I am rather like the sorcerer's apprentice when
I get at the typewriter. When I am turned on, a flood of words come and
hundreds of new pages pour out. All of which had to be sorted over by
Mr. Sammis and woven into the narrative, as he said.

All the while I worked I kept reminding him, not that I wanted to
complain, but that I was pretty well occupied by the life of the family,
my own and the Catholic Worker family here in the New York environs,
made up of scores of people in town and country. There were births and
deaths, marriages, and engagements, and of course always the conflicts
that go with community living. I would say that we are living in a hard
school where from day to day there is a war going on in which we can
only use the weapons of the spirit, and try to practice the non-violence
we talk so much about. During the winter this conflict took the shape of
a war between young and old, the twenty year olds and our senior
citizens, as they are euphemistically called by the press. Since we were
a community of need, it was the young ones, two of them, who in this
case left to continue their work elsewhere. The next crisis was a moral
one, not a simple one of techniques, or emphasis, or choice between two
goods. A group of beats or those desiring to follow the life of beats,
descended on us. This lasted some months. They came, they went.

Love and Sex
------------

My criticism was that they despised the life forces within man, that
they were nihilistic rather than pacifist, that their contempt was
directed against the very body of man, that temple of the holy Spirit,
and that all the four letter words they used so glibly (and so
reminiscent of our prison days) was to express this contempt, this
hatred,--not only of the square, of the bourgeoisie around them, but of
the life force in man himself. Also they lived and moved among the poor
as though they were not there, taking their meager housing space,
pushing in to table at the CW to get their share of the food, and so
living that they disregarded the affront they offered the simple,
reticent, decent and modest men among whom they lived.

All winter I had been reading Chekhov, his letters, stories and
novelettes and the very basic philosophy of work that he expressed in
his plays and stories gave me good ammunition in my talks about man's
necessity to earn his living by the sweat of his brow, not to be a
parasite on the social body, but mindful of the common good. I talked
too on sex and chastity, and in addition to the Gospel teaching of
Jesus, I cited Soloviev's book, "The Meaning of Love," but those to whom
I wished to speak were not there. I felt again the great gulf between
youth and age. "You can only tell people what they already know," Ade
Bethune had said to me once, quoting St. Augustine (if anyone knows the
exact quote I would like to have it.) A priest wrote in and asked for a
copy of my talk, and the letter was lost and I wish he would write me
again if he reads this.

Another occasion for my speaking on the subject of sex, was to a group
of non-Catholic students, participating in sit-ins and freedom rides,
and puzzled by the changing standards of our times, especially relating
to sex. Certainly sex and its place in life is as pertinent as the
discussion of war, capital punishment, and the role of the State in
man's life. I seldom speak at state universities or non-Catholic
colleges without the question of overpopulation, birth control,
abortion, and euthanasia coming up. The entire question of man's control
over the life of others, over the life forces within man, is one of the
most profound importance today. Kirilloff debated the question--Did God
create me or is my life my own, to do with as I chose? And as an
absolute gesture of defiance, an assertion of independence, a denial of
God's existence, he took his life.

New Houses
----------

My book, which the publisher wishes to call "The Cost of Love," and
which I urge to be called "Loaves and Fishes," will be about Peter
Maurin and the Catholic Worker, how it started, and continued through
his life time and how it has gotten along since his death. It was good
to bring the Catholic Worker story up to date, to let people know that
we go on in spite of jail sentences, evictions, the comings and goings
of people--that we are a family, and our very readers make up that
family together with us at Chrystie Street and the farm. To let them
know that there are other houses starting up. There is not only Ammon's
House of Hospitality in Salt Lake City, but also the new one, St. Elijah
house in Oakland, and St. Demetrius house in Boulder, Colorado. People
come and go, houses open and close, but there are always readers of the
paper, inspired by the charm of Lady Poverty and the means she offers,
and by the love of their brothers to embrace this life and begin to
study all it entails in non-violence and personalism.

Brazil
------

Probably the book will come out next January. By then many other things
will have happened and I will have to write another book. Perhaps a book
about Brazil. I suppose the grapevine has spread the news that I am
contemplating a trip to Brazil and making all my plans and suffering
many delays. My book *The Long Loneliness*  has been translated into
Portuguese by Aimee Amorosa Lima and has been widely circulated these
last few years. So our work is known there. The McCloskey articles about
the Catholic Worker movement which was part of his Harvard thesis was
translated into Spanish and circulated in the Argentine.

Passports
---------

I have obtained a passport with no difficulty, swearing that I would
defend my country by those means which did not conflict with my
conscience. The passport was sent to me three days after my application.
But having been invited by a number of friends who have been to Cuba or
who live in Cuba now, to come and see how things are going there now, I
decided I would as a journalist apply for a Cuban visa. One of our
readers, a rabbi from Boston, whom I had met at Fr. Robert Hovda's in
North Dakota, wrote me that he had had no difficulty in getting a visa
from the United States government as editor of a Jewish magazine. So I
sent in my letter of application together with my passport three weeks
ago and have heard nothing since. It should not take more than ten days,
one of our experienced traveller friends assured me. So I wait.

Meanwhile, without the passport I cannot get my Brazilian visa. At that
embassy I was assured that if one stayed only two months one did not
need a visa. But the steamship line (Danish) which goes to Brazil sent
me word this morning that they would not receive any passengers who did
not have a visa to Brazil in their hands two weeks before sailing.

Change of Plans
---------------

More news has just arrived which makes me believe that it would be
better for me to postpone my trip to Brazil until next April--but I am
still trying for the Cuba visa and if it comes through (it is supposed
to be even slower on the Cuban than it is on the American side), I shall
be able to give more direct reports from these as to the co-operative
farms, the family, the church and the clergy.

There is a good staff at both farm and beach and city, and I feel that
this is a good time to do this travelling and writing, especially since
God has sent me the means, most unexpectedly, to pay my fare. I am
offered hospitality and can live on rice and beans so this will be no
luxury trip. I ask our readers' prayers that the way will open up to me
on these travels, this pilgrimage.

GOOD READING I have done this summer.
-------------------------------------

For most stimulating discussion about the coming Council in Rome and the
Liturgical movement read WORSHIP published at St. Johns, Collegeville,
Minn. Also The Briefery, 7215 North Ridge Avenue, Chicago 45, Ill.
Jubilee and Summer issue of Cross Currents, Commonweal and America.
Monthly and weeklies.

For most complete coverage of peace news subscribe for THE PEACEMAKER
($2 a year), 10208 Sylvan Avenue (Gano) Cincinnati 41, Ohio.

The Poor Man's Prayer, the story of Credit Union beginnings, by George
Boyle, Helicon Press, Baltimore, Md.

Two books on the Montessori system, one by Nancy Rambusch, published by
the Helicon Press, and another by Standing, author of the life of Maria
Montessori, published by the Academy Guild Press, Fresno, Calif. Both of
these books will be reviewed by Eileen Fantino Diaz in the next issue.

Down and Out in Paris and London, and Road to Wigan Pier, both in
Paper-backs, and by George Orwell. These books are recommended for
anyone who is working with the poor. For all those who talk about
whether people are rehabilitated, converted or grateful these books are
a must. Also all of Chekhov's plays and short stories.

As for spiritual reading, The New Testament Reading Guide, Gospels and
Epistles with introduction and commentary, published by the Liturgical
Press, Collegeville. The Pamphlet Bible Series, Commentaries and
complete text of each book of the Old Testament, a new volume published
each month by The Paulist Press, East Fifty-ninth St., New York City.
