% On Pilgrimage - June 1963
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1963, 1, 2, 6, 8.

*Summary: Reports on John XXIII's last public appearance and words before his death and their earlier audience with him. In her meeting with Vatican officials she says she hopes the Council will discuss the morality of war and peace. (DDLW \#804.)*

From Rome

Monday, June third, I landed from the Vulcania Italian Line Ship at
45th Street New York, at eight o'clock in the morning to find Nina
Polcyn of St. Benet's Book Shop of Chicago waiting for me with Stanley
Vishnewsky, Tom Cornell, Terry Becker, Arthur J. Lacey (with dispatch
case and letters), Joe Maurer, and Chris, Irish-American playwright and
actor, and Cesare a young Argentinian. We had been getting only the most
meager reports as to the Pope's health on board ship where the news was
given out each day in Italian on a tabloid news sheet. Each morning at
Mass the chaplain had asked our prayers for the Holy Father, and each
afternoon at Benediction we had repeated those prayers.

Death of the Pope
-----------------

We were still sitting at our lunch with people coming and going in the
little apartment on Kenmare Street, when someone came in with news of
the Pope's death at three in the afternoon. It had been a long agony and
daily I prayed the Eastern rite prayer for a Adeath without pain@ for
this most beloved Father to all the world. But I am afraid he left us
with the suffering which is an inevitable part of love, and he left us
with fear, too. If the reports of his last words are correct, fear that
his children, as he called all of us in the world, were not listening to
his cries for **pacem in terris**. He was offering his sufferings, he
had said before his death, for the continuing Council in September, and
for peace in the world. But he had said, almost cheerfully, that his
bags were packed, and that he was ready to go, and that after all death
was the beginning of a new life. "Life is changed, not taken away," as
the Preface in the mass for the dead has it. And just as Therese of
Lisieux said that she would spend her heaven doing good upon earth, so
in his love, John XXIII will be watching over us.

It was on the day before I sailed for New York, May 22, Wednesday, that
I had the tremendous privilege of being present at his last public
appearance. He stood in his window looking out over the crowd in front
of St. Peter's. An audience had been scheduled as usual for that
Wednesday at ten-thirty, and the great Basilica was crowded to the doors
when the announcement was made that the Pope had been too ill the night
before to make an appearance that day but that he would come to the
window and bless the crowd, as he was accustomed to do each Sunday noon.

I had had an appointment that morning for ten-thirty at the office of
Cardinal Bea, to see his secretary, Fr. Stransky, the Paulist, about a
meeting I was to have with the Cardinal that night and was leaving the
No. 64 bus at the colonnade to the left of St. Peter's. I noticed that
the people leaving the bus were hastening to the square. Word gets
around Rome quickly and when I inquired I was told that the Holy Father
would be at the window in a moment. I hastened to a good position in the
square and was there in time to see the curtains stir and the Pope
appear. I had not realized how tremendous that square was until I saw
how tiny the Pope's figure seemed, up at that window of the apartment
under the roof. Those rooms used to be servant's quarters and had been
occupied by the popes since Pius X.

The voice of the Holy Father came through a loud speaker of course, and
seemed strong. He said the Angelus (which we say before meals at the
Peter Maurin farm), then the prayer to the guardian angels and ended
with a requiem prayer for the dead.

It was the last time the public saw his face (many of the crowd had
opera glasses, so one can use that expression). Questioning those at the
little convent where I had been staying in Rome the last week, I learned
the subject of the Pope's last talk, at his last Wednesday audience. He
had urged all to read and study his last encyclicals, the call to the
Council, **Mater et Magistra** and **Pacem in Terris**. He had said all
he had to say, this was the message he left the world.

Last Words
----------

"There is an immense task incumbent on all men of good will, namely the
task of restoring the relations of the human family in truth, in
justice, in love and in freedom; the relations between individual human
beings; between citizens and their respective communities; between
political communities themselves; between individuals, families,
intermediate associations and political communities on the one hand and
the world community on the other. This is a most exalted task, for it is
the task of bringing about true peace in the order established by God.

"Admittedly, those who are endeavoring to restore the relations of
social life according to the criteria mentioned above, are not many; to
them We express Our paternal appreciation, and we earnestly invite them
to persevere in this work with greater zeal. And We are comforted by the
hope that their number will increase especially among those who believe.
For it is an imperative of duty, it is a requirement of love."

Applications
------------

Yes, we will meditate on his words to us all, because he said he was
addressing all men of good will, and we know too, as we have known in
the past, how difficult it is to apply these words to individual
situations. We need all the gifts of the Holy Spirit, for our work, we
need all the help of our guardian angels, and to make our non-Catholic
and non-believing readers know what these words mean, we are printing
together with this column of pilgrimage, definitions of the gifts of the
Holy Spirit, as well as what the guardian angels mean to us who believe.
And not to know these things, for those of us who do believe, means not
to know the treasure we have, the resources we have to draw upon.

The Pilgrimage
--------------

To report further about the trip to Rome which came about because a
group of women, mostly of other faiths, and including those who did not
believe, had called for this attempt to reach the Holy Father with a
plea for a condemnation of nuclear war, and a development of the ideas
of non-violent resistance. This very attempt brought out clearly how
difficult are these attempts at unity and co-existence.

It is no easier to receive a hearing with princes of the Church that it
is to receive one from the princes of this world. There is protocol,
there is hierarchy and blocs of one kind or another, there is diplomacy
in what we generally consider to be the realm of the spirit. There is
maneuvering for credit and recognition from groups and nationalities
among the women themselves. This latter began as soon as the plane load
of women arrived from the States and found that Hildegard Goss Mayr,
Marguerite Harris and I had drawn up a preliminary paper, a one page
message to be sent to the Holy Father. Because of the Pontiff's
precarious state of health, the message had to be in the hands of his
secretaries by eleven the next morning, Monday, in order that we be
recognized at the coming Wednesday audience. There seemed to be no
chance of a smaller audience, or any special recognition. But to be
assured that our message reached him, it had to be short, complete and
accompanied by individual letters from the women, and a summary of the
make up of the pilgrimage. For this latter, Marguerite had worked
valiantly every afternoon and evening on board the ship in our cabin on
the way over from New York. She had typed up many copies of concise
biographies of the American women concerned and had them ready for that
first meeting.

But the acceptance of that one page message caused the most trouble. It
meant a meeting that lasted from the time the women assembled until two
o'clock in the morning and though it was finally accepted as revised,
there was renewed discussion the next morning, another meeting right
after breakfast and then the hasty departure to meet the Cardinal who
was going to bring it to the attention of the Holy Father.

This was only the first of continual meetings, meetings about the
letters to be presented, about other people to see, influences to be
exerted, meetings as to whether one sector or another of the group of
sixty or seventy were being properly understood or treated. The language
barrier made everything harder. We were from so many countries, so many
faiths, so many backgrounds. Some of the women had so little money, that
they actually did not have enough to pay the extra costs of lunches and
the one sightseeing trip that we all took together which came to only
about seventy five cents a piece. Certainly there was too little time
for us to get acquainted with each other. But I think most of us have
lists of the women who were there, and most of us hope to see each other
again and perhaps get acquainted better through correspondence of one
kind or another. There is so much peace literature being gotten out and
one thing it does is to draw us together. Most of us thought we knew
Virginia Naeve, for instance, just through all her short notes by which
she kept us together before the pilgrimage began.

The Audience
------------

The day of the audience arrived and the big busses came to the door, and
it did not seem that we were being treated as of any more importance
than the bus loads of school children who were coming from all over
Europe during their Easter holiday to see Rome and attend the large
general audience which took place each Wednesday at St. Peter's.

We waited as everyone else waited outside in the square, two of our
members in wheel chairs. We passed though the showing our unprivileged
tickets, and back past the bureau of excavations and through one of the
side doors and around into a section already packed with people. Klare
Fassbinder, the leader of the German group had managed four special
tickets; the Japanese representative, dressed in her lovely costume and
bearing gifts for the Holy Father, and the two women in wheel chairs
were put near the front. But the large body of Pilgrims of the group
were far to the rear and unable to see over the heads of the multitude.
It was only by searching around individually that we were able to get a
better view. Two other women and I were pulled by a young, gay Italian
girl up into one of the tribunes where there was a tremendous view of
the crowd and where we would be able to see the Pope come in and ascend
the throne, but that space was only cleared a little because a huge
pillar was in the way of seeing the Holy Father, himself when he was
seated before the altar, ready to speak.

It was long to wait. Probably people were standing two hours and it was
not until twelve-twenty that finally there was a surge in that vast mob
and a sudden silence followed by almost a roar of greeting. Borne aloft
on his chair, (and how could any have seen him if he were not conducted
in this way,) the procession proceeded around the columns and then the
Pope, blessing all, was conducted up to his throne where he sat while a
list of all the groups and pilgrims was read aloud. As the names of the
villages of Italy, and the schools of the Continent, and of England and
the United States was read out, applause came from various parts of this
vast group. And our pilgrimage was not mentioned!

But then the Pope began to speak and the words that fell from his lips
seemed to be directed to us, to our group, speaking as he did about the
"Pilgrims for Peace" who came to him, and his gratitude for their
gratitude and encouragement. The young woman who had helped us find our
places was translating his words as fast as he spoke them, and writing
them down while two of us read over her shoulder. She kept beaming at
us, and all those around us, seeing our buttons, large almost as
saucers, bright blue bearing the legend "Mothers for Peace" in Italian,
also smiled and indicating the Holy Father and us in turn, seemed to be
letting us know that he was speaking to us especially.

It seemed too good to be true and if all those around us had not kept
assuring us he was speaking to us, I would have considered it but a
coincidence. Our messages had reached him we felt, impossible though it
had seemed they would. I wrote these things in my post-script to my
account in the last month's issue of the **CW**, but I am calling
attention in more detail this month to our difficulties.

Communist Infiltration
----------------------

We were truly an ecumenical group made up as we were of all faiths, of
believers and unbelievers, and I had no doubt but that a few of the
women, perhaps one or two, were working with the communist peace group
too. This did not disturb me, though I would prefer that those of that
political point of view were more open about it so that there were more
chance of frank discussion about our positions and points of
concordance. One can understand however the economical disadvantage, the
loss of jobs that such openness would lead to.

This infiltration, (the very word infiltrate has a connotation of
hostility and fear so that I do not like to use it, but it is the only
one which conveys the idea of secretiveness) is bound to go on in a
movement which is reaching such proportions as the peace movement. In
the past such groups with whom the CW has always cooperated, the War
Resisters League, the Fellowship of Reconciliation, the American Friends
Service Committee, the Peacemakers, the Women's International League for
Peace and Freedom, have been free from Communist membership. But
undoubtedly with the thousands now participating in mass demonstrations
around the country, this is no longer true.

It was because of this "certainty," an American priest stationed in the
Vatican told me, that the pilgrimage of women was not officially
received. I could only reply that if we understood the Holy Father's
last plea, he wished a closer association, a seeking for concordances,
and the opportunity to discuss oppositions. How could we know our
brother, keeping so aloof? I would like to go through the encyclical on
peace and count the number of times the word trust was used, how many
times we were urged to work together for the common good. We were to go
into the world as sheep among wolves, Jesus himself said, and St. John
Chrysostom commented on that by writing that if we ceased to be sheep we
no longer had the Good Shepherd with us. What have we to fear?

"That such trust would be used for political purposes by the
Communists," was the only reply that I got.

Cardinal Bea
------------

However I was assured by "Vatican sources" (I am using the customary
newspaper terminology but I mean Fr. Stransky,) that **The Catholic
Worker** was not under suspicion, though some of the women of the
pilgrimage had been told that we were a Communist group in Geneva!

The last evening I had my interview with Cardinal Bea and the
opportunity to tell him more about the peace pilgrimage and about the
women of the many churches who made it up. After all, he was the
Cardinal who according to all accounts is one of the most important and
influential men in Rome after the Pope and I was grateful indeed for the
opportunity I had for an hour's conversation with him in his apartment
in the Brazilian college out on the Aurelian Way. He asked after **The
Catholic Worker** in particular and details as to our work and told in
turn of his very happy visit to America and the many engagements he
could look forward to on a return visit.

I think it was seventy engagements to which he had been invited, and if
he came again, perhaps, his secretary said, he could also visit **The
Catholic Worker**.

I asked about the coming council and the probabilities of there being a
more exhaustive discussion of the morality, of the theology of war and
peace today, but I am afraid I got no definite answers save the
assurance that these things would be part of the schema on the Church
and the world.

Unfortunately I lost my notebook, the diary of my trip, so my report may
not be as exact as I would like it to be. I remember the Cardinal's
speaking of the **Focolari**, and how impressed he was with their
movement which has grown from its beginnings in the bomb shelters during
the Forties as that now it has spread all over the world.

My general impression was, all during my stay in Italy, that the clergy
did not know too much about any lay movements in the world that
questioned either the injustices of the social order by direct action,
or that tried to educate the people in the ways of peace, which would
include refusal of conscription or the payment of taxes for war, and in
the racial struggles the confronting of the enemy with non-violence and
a sharing of poverty which would be the beginning of true courage, the
readiness to face suffering and death.

Conclusions
-----------

I came away from Rome more convinced then ever that the particular
vocation of **The Catholic Worker** is to reach the man in the street,
to write about the glorious truths of Christianity, the great adventure
of the spirit, which can effect so great a transformation in the lives
of men if they would consent to the promptings of the Spirit. We must
write about men like Mayor Giorgio La Pira, a Sicilian whom I met in
Florence, who is a third order Franciscan, who lives in poverty and
simplicity in a small hospital room, who took (by right of eminent
domain perhaps) the unused homes of the rich and gave them to the poor,
who preaches and teaches the poor as St. Francis did, and who is so
beloved in his city of Florence that he has been voted into office time
and again, and also by the Communists of his city.

"No, I am not afraid of the Communists," he told me. "I went twice to
Russia, the second time purely on a pilgrimage to visit some
monasteries. I met this extraordinary public official while I was in
Florence on the invitation of Jean Goss of the European Fellowship of
Reconciliation to speak to a small group of Protestants first, than
later at the Major Seminary where George Lorimer was my interpreter.
Jean Goss himself was speaking those nights to large audiences and he
too had to have an interpreter because he spoke only French. He is a
warm and ardent speaker and I had heard him (with interpreters) and was
much impressed.

A man who seems to me truly a prophet was Lanza Del Vasto who had come
to meet the pilgrimage women in Rome and who talked to us all one
morning. His wife was there, a most beautiful woman and a great singer
who trains the community in France which Del Vasto founded to sing, and
whose voice I brought back with me on a record.

I brought back also some writings of Lanza del Vasto which I hope to get
translated into English to bring out in **The Catholic Worker**, perhaps
in a series and which made a great impression of many of our readers. At
least we can publish enough of del Vasto's material to acquaint people
with his thought so that they can go on from there and get his books
themselves. Among his writings, the**Return to the Sources**, has had a
circulation of a hundred thousand copies. **From Gandhi to Vinobha**
however, is the only book which as been translated into English and was
printed only in England. I do not know whether it is still in print.

But I must conclude this installment of **On Pilgrimage**. I traveled
thousands of miles, visited Naples, Rome, Assisi, Florence, Siena,
Milan; spoke to American seminarians at the Goldoni Theater and to the
Holy Cross seminarians at their college out near the hospice Domus
Pacis, and to university students in Milan; was the guest of the great
religious artist William Congden who lives in Assisi. I crossed the
mountains to the Adriatic, to the little village in the mountain, San
Giovanni Rotondo, to see Padre Pio, all in six weeks, and I cannot
possibly get it down on paper in time for the June issue of **The
Catholic Worker** which goes to press late as it is, on June 12. There
is much more I could write, and much more I will write in the
July-August issue, to try to give some idea of the work of the lay
apostolate, by groups and individuals in that heart of the Church,
Italy, which is now by plane only six hours away from us here in the
United States. I went by boat and so spent more than two weeks on the
sea during the most holy seasons of the Church, Easter and Pentecost.
During both periods there was daily Mass attended by 400 tourist
passengers and members of the crew, and in the afternoon Benediction and
the rosary, not to speak of sermons and conferences by the ever present
chaplains which are part of the crew of every Italian ship. I lived for
the last eleven days with immigrants, from Egypt, Croatia, Italy and
Sicily, most of whom were getting off at Halifax, Nova Scotia to try to
find work in Canada.

I am happy to be home in the midst of a busy community again, planning
our summer season of vacations at the beach houses for the Puerto Rican
families in our neighborhood, and conferences for Sundays and some
week-ends at Peter Maurin Farm. I am still a bit dazed, I have not begun
to look through the suit cases of letters awaiting me, though thanks to
Marge Hughes, they have been acknowledged.

Fr. Urban, Trappist, stationed at the House of Studies at Tre Fontana in
Rome, offered the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass on the anniversary of Peter
Maurin's death in a chapel to our Lady in the crypt close to the tomb of
St. Peter. Mae Bellucci, old friend of the **Catholic Worker**whom I
encountered in Rome most unexpectedly, was with me. I had spent the
night at the convent of our Lady Reparatrix and we were up at the crack
of dawn hastening through the deserted streets to get to St. Peter's in
time for the seven o'clock Mass which Fr. Urban, at the request of Alice
Kathryn Caspar of Louisville, Kentucky, was saying for Peter. Peter died
in 1949, and May 15^th^ was his anniversary feast of St. John Baptist de
la Salle, founder of the Christian Brothers with whom Peter had taught
in Paris for a few years. For a time he was a member of that great
teaching order.

Fr. Urban
---------

After the Mass, I prayed at the tombs of Pius XII, Pius XI, and Benedict
XV, the pacifist pope as he has been called, and of St. Pius X. Thanks
to Fr. Urban who gave us generously of his time, we also had a trip down
into the most recent excavations, with an archeologist as a guide and
saw not only the old pagan tombs but the earliest Christian ones, and we
came as near as anyone could to the site of the burial of St. Peter
himself.

I could not help thinking as I saw these tombs of those who preceded the
Christian era, what great veneration there was for the dead. What wealth
and art was expended on the deceased. There were carvings of exquisite
beauty and I remember thinking at one tomb that the carved marble looked
as warm and glowing as old ivory.

Easy Essays
-----------

But what Peter would have loved in Rome was the work of Patrick
O'Reilly-Persichetti who had translated his essays into Italian and who
sang them with great and joyful enthusiasm to improvised tunes on his
guitar. The phrased writing, with its repetitions which we are still
printing in the **CW** lends itself to song, and indeed Peter seemed
like a troubador to us, going about in public squares declaiming his
ideas in what most of his hearers considered to be blank verse, or free
verse form.

Patrick is probably about 22 and has great talent as an actor and
producer and with his mother manages the old Goldoni Theater, the oldest
in Rome. It is a delightful place, down a very narrow street filled with
the shops of small artisans and near the Tiber. They both live there in
impoverished rooms built into the wings, and when they are not putting
on shows themselves they rent out the theater to others for concerts and
recitals. It was here on Saturday afternoon that I spoke to a large
group of seminarians who lingered long after to ask questions about
voluntary poverty and personal responsibility.

Little Sisters
--------------

Fr. Urban took me one afternoon to see the motherhouse of the little
Sisters of Jesus, whose fraternity was founded in 1939 in the Sahara and
which now comprises 200 fraternities numbering about 650 professed
sisters, who now work in Asia and Africa, in Canada, the States, and
South America as well as in Europe. The sisters earn their living by
manual work in factories, in hospitals, on the land, in some cases they
are consecrated to prayer in the fraternities of adoration, to manual
work in worker, rural or artisan fraternities, and to more direct tasks
of charity in fraternities of manual help or service. "Specialized"
fraternities of various types are consecrated to the sick, to nomadic
peoples, to prisoners, etc., or to certain specialized work, such as
handicrafts, for example.

So reads some leaflets given me by one of the Little Sisters who showed
us the new barracks which were being put up to accommodate all the
little sisters who were going to make the headquarters in Rome their
"Maison Generale." Some of the Little Sisters were doing heavy work,
carrying stones and earth and helping in the building, and others as we
talked came up the hill with laden shopping bags which were their
luggage. They were Italian sisters who had to go to their birthplace to
vote in the recent elections.

The tiny sitting room scarcely accommodated the four of us who sat
there, but the chapel was much larger, beautiful in its simplicity and
taste. And then we were taken to another chapel, down long, long flights
of steps carved out of the tufa down the side of the mountain and which,
with the help of some German seminarians, they had enlarged to form a
most impressive and beautiful place of worship.

The Little Sisters are settled in Rome too, in one of the poorest
districts, but I did not have time to search them out there. But I did
visit them in Assisi on a lovely sunny day, encountering them in the
Church of San Damiano, five of us with William Congden walked down a
long sunny road past little farms and vineyards to the small stone
house, a room to a floor, in which they live, three of them. After
visiting the Hermitage and the convent where St. Clare dwelt with her
nuns, I could only say that the Little Sisters were again living the
life of poverty in the world, that St. Francis and St. Clare had brought
into the life of the Church. How beautiful these renewals are.

Next month we will print a digest of Lanza del Vasto's work.

An Appeal
---------

I repeat an appeal to help cover the legal costs of the appeal on the
conviction of William Worthy, our good friend, long a correspondent for
the Baltimore African–American, Harvard graduate, writer and speaker.
His troubles started when he went to China together with other
newspapermen without the permission of the State Department. And on his
return a number of years back their passports were taken form them. The
other men on the promise that they would not repeat the offense had
their passports returned, but Bill Worthy refused to make such a
promise. His vocation is to find and report the news and his next
offense was to go into Cuba for six weeks. It was some time after his
return that he was arrested and tried and sentenced to three months.

The case will come up again on appeal either in Jacksonville Florida or
in New Orleans and money is needed for court costs. We had an appeal in
the paper a year ago and some money was received and we hope more will
be forthcoming. Bill Worthy is fighting an issue for all of us, for
freedom of travel, freedom of the press and freedom of speech.

I was much impressed on my recent trip to Europe that no visa was needed
to get into Italy or Spain or any other country in Europe (this side of
the Iron Curtain), just as we need no visa for Canada or Mexico or for a
number of the Latin American countries. How can we ease the terrible
tensions between our country and Cuba unless there is some freedom of
movement back and forth? Without Bill Worthy I would not have found the
friends I did in Cuba, Catholic and non-Catholic. Thanks to him my visit
there was most pleasant and fruitful, and so I am begging my friends and
readers, those who appreciated my articles from Cuba, to remember him
and send some help. If you wish to send it directly to the **Catholic
Worker** you may, and we will forward it, or you can send it to "The
Committee for the Freedom of William Worthy, Suite 301 217 W. 125^th^
St. New York 27, N.Y. Checks may be made payable to Bishop O. Ward
Nichols.
