% Fall Appeal - October 1963
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1963, 2.

*Summary: Reminds readers we are all responsible for each other--" Hold
on to each other. We are each one responsible, one for another. We are
all brothers." (DDLW \#807).*

Dear fellow workers in Christ,

"Joy is a sign of God's presence in the soul."--I keep coming across
this sentence of one of the saints, and the word **joy**and the word
**God**do something to you. It is pretty easy for me to be joyful this
Fall afternoon, sitting at my typewriter after a good day of reading and
housecleaning. I woke up to read Boyer's NEWMAN for an hour. I stopped
on page 71 with the phrase, "The analogy between this world and the
next, and a sound system of probability leading to religious faith--"

Down at the beach house the view is one of quiet beauty. There is an
offshore wind and the little waves are only murmuring on the shore. The
bay is deep blue and a playful wind makes skirmishes here and there on
the water so that the color is always changing and it is as though there
were truly paths on the sea.

It is a joy to feel grateful for this beach house which has sheltered so
many mothers and children this summer. Eight families have had the joy
of the sea, the sand and the sun. Through the fall and winter the beauty
is here for others. "The heavens show forth the glory of God and the
firmament showeth His handiwork."

It is so easy to love God in the beauty of nature, the beauty of little
children, the beauty of the grandmother and great grandmother who came
down to take care of one batch of children, for instance. Easy to find
joy here. But St. Francis tells too of another kind of joy, "perfect
joy" he calls it, when one is beaten and buffeted and ill-used, denied
and scorned even by one's own. "This then is perfect joy," he says in
one of the tales told in "The Little Flowers of St. Frances." It surely
is "walking by faith and not by sight," on these occasions. "When a
person is old, or drunken or crazy, the family throws them out," one of
our CW family said sadly the other day.

On my way to a communion breakfast not long ago, we passed a great
mental hospital and the man driving me commented on the guards within
the grounds. "Not to keep the patients in," he said, "but to keep people
from dumping their senile relatives who don't remember name or address.
Quite a few cases last year." The man was a city official so I must take
his word for it.

Another man, a member of our community who has been with us the past two
years, was found wandering in the woods of Staten Island, dirty,
starving and covered with vermin. The police took him to a local
hospital and Holy Mother the city cleaned him up and cared for him.
Another old man, sick and incontinent was found homeless, in a doorway
on the Bowery. He told us he had worked on Long Island potato farms when
he left the orphanage where he was reared. Waifs and strays, a lot of
our people are. We are most of us pretty much the "offscouring" St. Paul
spoke of.

When I read Baldwin's **Another Country** about a kid ready to sell
himself for a meal, I thought thank God we have saved a few from that.
Just feeding people accomplishes something.

We are begging now, not only for the money we need to pay our bills to
keep us going another six months. But we beg you to not abandon each
other. Hold on to each other. We are each one responsible, one for
another. We are all brothers. We are all members or potential members of
the body of Christ and so are holy. We must not rend our own flesh, made
holy by Christ's incarnation. Let us love one another, without measure,
even to folly. "My little children, let us love one another," the
beloved apostle St. John kept repeating at the end of his life when they
asked him for direction. "Bear ye one another's burdens," St. Paul said.
So if you can help us out of your abundance, to supply our want, we will
love you all the more, in our gratitude.

St. Teresa said she had so grateful a heart, it could be bought with a
sardine. In the name of Francis who knew how to love and rejoice and of
Jesus who taught him, we thank you.
