% The Organizer
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1966, 1, 6.

*Summary: A chronicle of the life of Cesar Chavez and his organizing
work with the National Farm Workers Association. Admires his commitment
to non-violence, religious and moral values, and "hope and faith
animated by love." Says he is a man of vision and experience. Notes the
CW's long-time coverage of agricultural worker struggles. (DDLW \#831).*

**"Workers of the World, unite. You have nothing to lose but your
chains!"** This is one of those stirring slogans of the Marxists which
especially appeals to youth, no matter what kind of family they come
from, upper, middle, or lower middle class. If it does not attract them
to Marxism, it at least gives them a sense of community and relatedness
to other sufferers and combats the sense of futility and frustration
which encompasses so many.

Cesar Chavez is the leader of the Delano California farmworkers who are
on strike in an area which stretches for 400 miles and includes
thousands of acres of grapes, tomatoes, apricots, cotton--all kinds of
crops. This strike, which is been going on since last September, has an
appeal to all the poor of the United States. Chavez uses the word
commitment, a word much in style now. But he combines it with the idea
of necessity, the irrevocable.

"We are committed," he says. "When you lose your car, then lose your
home, you do not become less committed, but more. None of us has
anything more to lose."

The agricultural workers of this country have long been the most
abandoned and forgotten. They have been neglected in all Social Security
legislation. From the first issue of the **Catholic Worker**, down
through the years, we have written about the Negroes working on the
levees, about the dispossessed sharecroppers of Arkansas and Oklahoma,
the Mexicans in the onion fields of Ohio and Michigan, in sugar beets in
the middle Northwest, about those who work in the potato farms in Maine,
Long Island and New Jersey, in the turpentine woods of the South, about
the citrus pickers of Florida, the Delta Negroes now being dispossessed
from the cotton fields, and now the present strikers in California. The
**Catholic Worker** has dealt with these stories and I have personally
visited these fields of struggle. When the great acreage of farms
controlled by the Campbell Soup people in New Jersey were followed by
strike we urged boycott of these products and when the strike had been
won and the years passed, Hisaye Yamamoto, who lived with us on Peter
Maurin Farm for years, went back to the area to interview her fellow
Japanese who were by then working under greatly improved conditions.

It is a struggle through all the years of our lives which has to do with
**Factories in the Fields** (the title of a book of a generation past,
written by Carey McWilliams, present editor of the **Nation**, which can
still be found in the libraries.) It is a struggle which involves the
food problem of the world and the best way to handle it. It involves
discussion of the population problem, and so encompasses the all
absorbing needs of food and sex. It employs every nationality on West
and East coasts, from far-off India and Pakistan, southeast Asia, as
well as the Caribbean. It involves our own Negro and white Americans.

Over all these years there have been sporadic outbreaks among rural
workers from coast to coast. It is only now the nationwide picture has
become unified, under the leadership of a man of vision as well as of
experience. We had a story about the strike in California in our January
issue, written by a young **CW** reader who has been active there. Bob
Callagy, of the Oakland Catholic Worker group, and number of other young
families, are busy trucking food and clothing to the strikers.

So this continuation of the story is to call attention to Cesar Chavez
himself, and the interview I am basing it on is by Lisa Hobbs, the **San
Francisco Examiner and Chronicle** of January 16.

Chavez is thirty-seven years old and was born in Texas. His grandfather
had homesteaded near Yuma in 1889 and had very rich land just off the
Colorado River. Cesar and his four brothers and sisters were brought up
there. They were taught the Catholic faith by their grandmother, the
only member of the family who could read or write.

When the depression came, crop prices failed, and taxes were raised (to
care for the people put off the land and set to wandering with the crops
or living in the cities). The water bills, a big item in the West, went
unpaid, and the land was foreclosed. The grandparents and all the rest
of the family then went West to California and worked in the fields,
drifting from crop to crop.

Chavez himself only went as far as the 8th grade but read widely,
biographies and history as well as the Bible. He discovered, he says,
"that Paul was a great organizer who would go out and talk to the people
right in their homes and be one of them." He was doubtless impressed too
with the fact that St. Paul was a worker, who earned his living by
weaving tents from goat hair.

When Chavez was in his mid-twenties his organizing ability was
recognized by the Community Service Organization, a statewide group
supported by voluntary contributions to assist the Mexican American in
citizenship and legal problems. He served as statewide organizer and
after seven years experience was appointed executive director of the Los
Angeles headquarters. After ten years of this kind of work, he went back
to work in the fields and to organize. His wife Helen, mother of 8
children, was born in Delano and so the present "revolution" is starting
there.

Six years ago, when I drove out through Arizona and up the California
Valley, I wrote of the lettuce strike around El Centro and told of
meeting a young Italian priest whose family were landowners, and the
beginning of his interest in the problems of the workers. I wrote, too,
of the CIO auto workers' attempts to organize around Stockton, and of
Hank Anderson and Henry Van Dyke, whose reports showed vision for all of
California.

Now Chavez has organized his National Farm Workers Association, which
seems able to work side-by-side with the existing unions in the field.
Since the strike started a bulletin has been published, attractively
illustrated by Mexican worker artists which may be received by writing
to **El Malcriado**, Box 894, Delano, Calif., for \$2 a year. In the
bulletin one finds indications of the larger purpose which Cesar Chavez
has in mind. The insistence on non-violence, the emphasis on the
religious and moral aspects of the strike, and the expression of hope
and faith animated by love, make this strike different from any other I
have ever written about.

Cesar Chavez also takes a national view, as the name of his association
indicates. What he hopes to do, to begin to do, is to change the face of
agriculture in the Long Valley in California, up and down the coast, and
on through southwest and south and up the East Coast. This vision is not
that of an excited imagination, but a result of living for a lifetime
with these problems, and the sense that God plays a hand in these
events. "One must start somewhere. Delano is just the beginning but it
cannot be all at once," he says.

"But when it happens, when we win, it will be a very dramatic thing. We
can point to the workers everywhere and say: 'Remember Delano'."

I beg our readers prayers and support. Help may be sent to: Cesar
Chavez, **Box 894, Delano, Cal.** persons interested in the life of
working with the grassroots organization in an effort to organize poor
people in the California Valleys and to our pharmacists, master
mechanics or accountants contact: **LeRoy Chatfield, Director, Farm
Workers Coâ€“Op, National Farm Workers Assn, Box 894, Delano,
California**. An adequate salary will be provided for such persons and
their families.

(To Be Continued in Next Issue)

