% On Pilgrimage - October 1965
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, October 1965, 1, 8.

*Summary: While in Rome during the fourth session of Vatican Council II,
she and a group of women fast and pray, aiming to influence the council
deliberations on war and non-violence. Emphasizes the need for lay input
in addressing the problems of the modern world. Describes her
accommodations and dinners with bishops and friends. (DDLW \#832).*

"We have two days in each one here in Rome," a young Jesuit from Malta
told me. "That break in the day from 12:00 until 4:00 which bothers
tourists and catches them unawares, brings about this multiplication of
days. I wake up at 4:00 a.m. and so get in a good day's work and am
ready for lunch and my siesta. Then I begin again and work until
midnight, with a break for dinner around 8:30." The signs on the shops
say: **Open 8-12,** **16-20**, or the equivalent. Of course many of the
Council Fathers do not have this relaxed way of dealing with time. Mass
at St. Peter's is at 9:00; the session lasts until 12:30; a press
briefing is held until 1:30 or even 2:00; there is a brief lunch; panel
discussions in many languages at 3:00; conversations that go on until
after 5:00---and then I suppose they rest until dinner. I have had the
joy of meeting many friends, bishops, priests and lay people from all
over the country, here on the streets of Rome and at these meetings, not
to speak of luncheons and dinners. As usual my life is full of
contrasts, dining out with bishops and at home on a hard roll, a paper
cone of olives and a piece of mozzarella cheese. You can live cheaply in
Rome as a pilgrim if you know the simple trattoria, hot shops and
pushcarts, and you see many a dignified citizen lunching on a sandwich
as he walks along the streets. There are even the restaurants of St.
Peter, supported by the Vatican, which the guide book **Europe on Five
Dollars a Day** warns are for the poor and not for tourists.

The room in which I am writing reminds me very much of our own Italian
section in New York. It is a small room with a very high ceiling. The
immense window takes up the whole rear, and through my Venetian blinds I
can look down one flight into a large courtyard divided into two parts
by a wall, over which a luxuriant grapevine climbs. Pots of ivy, roses,
and other plants fill one court, and the other, directly under me, is
festooned with clotheslines. The sheets hanging from them help reflect
the light up into my room. The windows are wide open and there are
shelves of plants under some of the windows and little birdcages hung
next to others. Children play in the yard, and there are fountains and
tubs of waters for washing clothes at each end. Sometimes you can hear
the fountain running all night. Rome is famed for her glorious
sculptured figures in every piazza. There are always people taking their
ease around these fountains, and children bathe in them in the summer.
It is hot now during the day, but there is an autumn chill in the air
and at night a wind springs up.

My room costs seven hundred lira a day, which amounts to a little over a
dollar. (A dollar is worth six hundred and twenty lira). Bus fares are
fifty lira, and I pay two fares each way to get to St. Peter's and back.
the streetcars and buses are crowded and, because of the double-day,
there are four rush hours.

I would not like to think of driving here, but I am getting quite
accustomed to the rhythm of traffic, thanks to the reassuring briefing I
received from Vincent McAloon, the head of the Notre Dame Alumni Center
(Large Brancaccio 82). Mr. McAloon gave a discourse on how to cross a
street that was so inspiring that I have been able to proceed with
confidence in the midst of the wildest assault of foreign cars from all
directions it has ever been my confusion to see. I go stolidly ahead,
and, miracle of miracles, cars make way, dash fore and aft of me. In the
two weeks I have been here, I have yet to hear the clang of ambulances.
As one Dominican brother explained, "You present them with your life,
these drivers, and they graciously hand it back to you."

Fourth Session
--------------

And what of the Council? They have scarcely gotten into the
thirty-thousand-word pastoral constitution on the Church in the Modern
World, which will eventually, after debate by the Fathers and subsequent
revisions, be promulgated, either as a new constitution (in which case
it will be doctrinal and claim the assent of clergy and laity) or as a
"declaration" (which term might lessen the authority of the text). It is
clarification of this kind which is being attempted at the afternoon
panel discussions. Father John Courtney Murray was the chief consultant
at the first week's panel. Ten other theologians took part, including
such diverse authorities as Monsignor Francis J. Connell, editor of the
American Ecclesiastical Review, Father George Tavard, and Father
Frederick McManus, the last two most sympathetic friends of ours. The
panel meets in a small theater with a main floor and a balcony, so there
is plenty of room. Every effort is made to answer the questions of the
press and other people attending.

Last March, John Cogley wrote in **America** that he felt "on the outside
looking in," that there did not seem to be a genuine confrontation of
the laity and clergy, bound together in the service of the same cause,
the Church's **aggorniamento** or renewal. "Secular wisdom was missing."
The Fathers of the Council and their theological advisors "are at their
least impressive both substantively and rhetorically when they attempt
to deal with thorny practical issues like nuclear war or the population
problem...clerical and lay mind are both necessary to shape a total
Catholic response to the modern world, which is one of the aims of
Vatican II...but the Council's emphasis is overwhelmingly on the
former...the layman is an intruder of sorts and sooner or later
recognizes the fact."

This may be true during the Council sessions in Rome, but when I read
the document on the Church in the modern World, which notes the
"interventions" of the thousands of clergymen who commented on the
original draft, it seemed evident that laymen had, however indirectly,
contributed their thought on vital questions of the day, whether they
are represented by the revolutionary tin miners of Bolivia, the hard -
pressed families, youth "stirred to rioting" or women no longer
accepting their lack of status in the Church and the world. The result
has been calls for discussion from both sides, so the document seems a
tortuous affair, veering to this way and that. It is hard to see how the
work of discussion, clarification, and voting will ever be accomplished.
But Cogley went on to write of the sense of mystery and the awe he felt
during the assembly of the Council and of his conviction that in a group
coming together with such lofty aims the presence of the Holy Spirit is
indeed felt.

New Friends and Old
-------------------

I arrived at Naples on the Raffaello. I have a great love for St.
Raffaello, patron of travellers, to whom Ernest Hello, the French
mystic, once addressed a prayer beginning: "Lead us to those we are
looking for, those who are looking for us." I was led at once to the
Notre Dame Center I mentioned earlier and to Vincent McAloon, who found
me a place to live and who directs me daily on my involved journeys
around Rome. At this center of hospitality I have received my mail and
here I have met Dr. Joseph Evans and his wife Hermine, of Chicago,
Richard Carbray, who teaches at Rosary College, and James Douglass, who
teaches theology at Bellarmine College, in Louisville, Kentucky.
Douglass has been meeting every day with bishops to discuss the
paragraph in the schema on the Church in the Modern World that deals
with the weapons of modern war. I too have been watching and praying
about article 101, which concerns the rights of conscience of Catholics,
humanists, and all others averse to the use of violence. I have with me
three hundred copies of the summer issue of the **Catholic
Worker,** which was dedicated to the bishops of the Council. Thanks to
the American Pax Association and its secretary Howard Everngam, this
issue had already been sent to the bishops of the entire world.

I have also met Donald Quinn, the editor of the **St. Louis Review,** who
is here with his wife, Bob Hoyt, the editor of the **National Catholic
Reporter,** and Monsignor Francis Brown, the editor of the Steubenville
**Register.** I had dinner with Monsignor Brown, Bishop Shannon, of St.
Paul, and Frank McDonald, a Notre Dame man now at Oxford, who is
spending this time at Rome because he is learning Italian and is
fascinated by the Council. The bishop talked about tradition, quoting T.
S. Elliot, and Frank, who could be included among the rebellious youth
whom the Council schema says must be listened to and taken into
consideration, was deeply impressed. I thought of how rare such men as
Bishop Shannon are, men who show respect for all others and listen to
them with sympathy. In his **Journey of a Soul,** Pope John XXIII paid
tribute to one such priest, Father Francesco Pitocchi, who was always
ready to listen to the poor. I am thinking of myself as I wrote this,
and of how those as old as I do not listen enough, with warmth and
loving kindness. Not that one should not speak. Certainly I myself find
it easy to talk to someone who talks readily, just as I relapse into
silence before the silent.

Among other great ones of the clerical world with whom I dined were
Archbishop Thomas D. Roberts, Bishop John Wright, of Pittsburgh, and
Bishop Joseph Brunini, of Jackson. And I briefly encountered others,
whose hospitality cheered me, like Bishop Paul Hallinan, of Atlanta,
Bishop Delargey, of Auckland, New Zealand, and Bishop Eustace Smith,
O.F.M., of Beirut, Lebanon. I had lunch with Mariella Benziger and her
sister, with Janet Kalven, of the Grail, with Father Riches, who is a
convert and a cousin of the two Fathers de Menasce, whose writings in
the **Commonweal** have impressed me so, and with Sister John Baptist,
from California. And I paid my respects to his Beatitude, Maximos IV
Saigh, Patriarch-Cardinal, who offers his liturgical worship in Arabic
and Greek.

I met Trappists too, priests and students who are permitted to speak and
visit while in Rome. Father Lamb is a friend of Father Charles English,
one of our former editors, and we had a pleasant day together before he
went back to his studies. He gave me the address of the Little Sisters
of Jesus, whose place is on the Viculo de Onofrio, in a poor section
across the Tiber. The headquarters of the Little Sisters is on the
grounds of the Trappist Monastery at Tre Fontana, which I visited last
time I was in Rome on the pilgrimage of women for peace.

Happy Beginning
---------------

But I must pay tribute to St. Anthony and to the honesty of the Italian
people. When I arrived in Rome from Naples, I tried to telephone Vincent
McAloon from the terminal. I was not able to reach him and was about to
get into a cab when I realized that I had left my bag hanging on the
telephone. Ruth Collins had bought the bag in India and given it to me a
year ago, and it contained my passport, purse and travelers checks, not
to speak of books and so on. Praying desperately and with my heart
pounding, I rushed back to the telephone and found three men standing
there, a soldier and two porters. **"Dove? Mi bolsa?"** I gasped. I was
answered with beaming smiles and led away by one of them to a counter
for tourists, where I was given my bag, to the happiness of all. Two
thousand lira sounds like a big reward, but it is about three dollars
and fifty cents, a very small sum in comparison to what I had almost
lost. It was a happy introduction to Rome.

A week from now I shall begin the ten-day fast for peace, initiated by
Chanterelle del Vasto, in which a score of women from all over the world
will take part. Certainly prayer and fasting are needed today, our own
work to overcome the spirit of violence in the world.

Ed. note: On the day before going to press, we received a communication
from Dorothy Day, who writes that she and the other women have completed
their retreat and fast, and that she will be back in New York on October
22nd. "Everyone," she adds, "said our visits and our fast and vigil (we
each kept an hour before the Blessed Sacrament each day besides daily
Mass) did much good." The fast was publicly announced during a Council
session by Bishop Boillon, of Verdun (France).
