% On Pilgrimage - February 1968
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, February 1968, 2, 8.

*Summary: Resists the "January doldrums" and writes about the continuing struggle
of California farm workers. Tells of her visit to Sicily and England,
giving details of the plane flights and her reasons for preferring
planes over buses and ships. Praises the work of mercy of a disabled
man. Keyword: nonviolence (DDLW \#862).*

My sister and I used to call them the January doldrums. I'm having them
now, faced as I am with a lot of work on the typewriter that I do not
want to do. There are piles of mail to answer on each desk up here at
Tivoli. Marge Hughes has a heap of letters. Stanley has a heap, I have a
heap. Marge's Johnny has had flu and I've had a recurring cold. But do
not think we are depressed. Interesting visitors arrive, there is
interesting news in newspapers or magazines to be discussed, some good
books come in from the publishers, and we are filled with vim. When we
return to our desks, we are in the doldrums again.

Was it Dr. Abraham Low or Father John J. Higgins, S.J. (may they both
rest in peace) who gave such simple and good advice in the group-therapy
sessions known as Recovery meetings? To the woman who complained that
she could not face the huge basket of laundry to be ironed--men's shirts
and children's school clothes--the answer was: "Put the basket behind
you, reach back and take out one shirt and iron it. Go on from there."
It sounds idiotic, but I start my On Pilgrimage article in this spirit.
Just to sit down and put one word after another. I write this for your
comfort. We are all alike, in that we are in the doldrums or the deserts
or in a state of **acedia** at one time or another.

Delano Pickets
--------------

I am at Tivoli as I begin to write this. My room faces the river and I
get up every now and then to see a ship pass by--freighters from
Finland, tankers, cement barges, tugs, Coast Guard boats breaking
through the ice. The freight train that just passed distracted me. As I
used to do as a child; I counted the cars, ninety-seven of them, many of
them marked Pacific Fruit. They made me think of our friends, Julian
Balidoy, Fernando Garcia, Severino Manglio, Juan Berbo, Nicholas
Valenzuelo, and others who stayed with us last year, in a cold
three-room apartment on Kenmare Street. They would rise at dawn or
earlier to set out on their daily job of approaching wholesalers and
retailers, asking them not to handle the grapes coming from California,
where so many of the workers in the vineyards are on strike. They are
trying to build up a union of agricultural workers, and have succeeded
in winning contracts with the growers, each success won after the daily
work of setting out on such visits as these and conducting continuing
picket lines, which are in a way "supplicatory processions," prayers, to
the good God that He will keep them from bitterness and hopelessness and
class war. The world is full enough of war as it is and daily there are
threats of more wars. There are realignments of allies, a strange
shuffling of forces. Weren't Russia and China our allies in the Second
World War? And weren't Germany and Japan our enemies?

The alternative is to educate for nonviolence, love of brother (and all
men are brothers) while being always on the side of the poor, a
predilection shared by Almighty God and His son Jesus Christ, who, in
Matthew 25, told us to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, shelter the
haborless, visit the prisoner (or even better, ransom him), visit the
sick, and bury the dead--decently, with respect for that silenced body
which has served for this all too brief life on earth.

God is on the side even of the unworthy poor, as we know from the story
Jesus told of His father and the prodigal son. Charles Peguy, in **God**
**Speaks**, has explained it perfectly. Readers may object that the
prodigal son returned penitent to his father's house. But who knows, he
might have gone out and squandered money on the next Saturday night, he
might have refused to help with the farm work, and asked to be sent to
finish his education instead, thereby further incurring his bother's
righteous wrath, and the war between the worker and the intellectual, or
the conservative and the radical, would be on. Jesus has another answer
to that one: to forgive one's brother seventy times seven. There are
always answers, although they are not always calculated to soothe.

I can sympathize with the instinct of righteous wrath which leads people
to take to arms in a revolution, when I see the forgotten aged in mental
hospitals, and men sleeping in doorways on the Bowery, or fishing in
garbage cans for food, and families in the slums, often with no heat in
such weather as we have been having, and migrants in their shanty towns.
We have heated the apartments at Kenmare St. with the gas oven day and
night while the temperature was down to five below zero. We were more
comfortable than the people in the better apartments across the street,
where the boiler burst or froze up. Our cold-water pipes were frozen in
half of our house but we were able to fetch water from one another's
apartments. There were two toilets to a floor and one on each floor was
frozen and had to be padlocked.

The pickets from Delano have arrived, forty-five of them. They came by
rented bus. The heating system failed on the trip. Now they are being
given hospitality by the Seafarers International Union at 675 Fourth
Avenue, in Brooklyn. I have spoken at communion breakfasts in the dining
room of their hall, so I know how comfortable and well fitted out it is,
an indication of the gains the union movement has made over the past
thirty years.

Earthquake in Sicily
--------------------

It is less than three months ago that I was visiting Danilo Dolci and
travelling around western Sicily, which has since been stricken by
earthquake and bitter rain and cold. Our heartfelt sympathy goes out to
Dolci and to his fellow workers, and we hope that some of our readers
will send him checks that will help them in the additional work which
such a disaster has forced upon them. No matter how much governments and
the Red Cross do, there is always more to be done. And donations,
however small, are a reminder of sympathy. "Love is an exchange of
gifts," St. Ignatius once said. Two of Dolci's books, **A New World in
the Making** and**Waste** can be obtained from the Monthly Review Press,
116 West 14th St., New York, for $7.50 and $6.75 respectively. We
highly recommend the **Monthly Review**, to which we turn for
information about Latin American affairs. Subscription: $6.00 a year.

I did not mention in my last account of my pilgrimage to Italy and
England (December 1967) that, although I went by ship, I returned by
air. In my many trips around the country over the years, I have usually
gone by bus, partly on the ground of economy and also because it is
convenient from the standpoint of the visits I made to various houses of
hospitality. I would use a visit to a Texas school, where I received
perhaps two hundred and fifty dollars, plus expenses, as an excuse to
make a tour of Catholic Worker groups. Usually, by the time I got to San
Francisco I was exhausted. But I can no longer use economy as an excuse.
A trip to Minneapolis, for instance, is about seventy dollars by
non-stop flight, and you can arrive as fresh as when you started out.
When one has reached three score and ten years, traveling can be
exhausting.It was this exhaustion after my Italian trip that made me
overcome my fear of flight, which I think most of the older generation
shares. Certainly it is just as easy for a huge plane to stay in the air
as it is for a ship the size of the Waldorf Astoria to remain afloat. I
can only marvel at men's accomplishment in this technological era and
meditate again on the lack of development of our spiritual resources. I
like to think of St. Paul's words: "Though this outer man of ours may be
falling into decay, the inner man is renewed day by day." In the modern
world is seems just the opposite: the outer man's youth is renewed by
science and comfort and the inner man is corrupted by materialism.
Anyway, I am partaking with joy of the beauty and comfort of flying now,
and will try to pay for it with harder work and better use of my time.

\*\*\*
---

In Rome I had met a Father Galli, who runs a center for young boys. He
entertained a group of us at dinner one night on a roof garden just
above the center where movies are shown and lectures and instruction
given. He regaled us with stories of his visits to Staten Island and, on
the morning of my departure, met Eileen Egan and me at the airport with
a huge bunch of roses, and a relic of St. Helena for Eileen and a relic
of the Holy House of Loretto for me. "This also has flown," he said to
me, referring to the fact that the Holy House was supposed to have been
miraculously flown from Palestine to Italy, (Pope John XXIII once made a
pilgrimage to the Holy House). I am sure that many of our modern
iconoclasts would like to bomb it out of existence.

But it was my rosary that I clutched in my hand as I made the plane a
minute before we took off. Wedged between a priest and a brother on
their way to London, I was reminded of the crowded buses of Mexico,
where people (and sometimes sheep and chickens) were packed so close
that I used to think that in the accident which always seemed imminent
one would be well cushioned. The plane started off with an increasing
roar of the engines, which, rising to a crescendo, made me think of a
recurrent nightmare of my early childhood, a dream of a great roaring,
beginning quietly and increasing to unbearable noise, which I somehow
associated with my idea of God. What this noise conveyed to me now was a
sense of enormous power, lifting us with a great thrust into the air. I
did not realize that my eyes had been closed until I opened them to
notice that we were already above the clouds and our heavenly conveyance
was quite smooth, that is, until we began to feel that we were driving
over rough roads. One of my seat mates said, "bit of wind, probably,"
and none seemed concerned. It was a small, one-class plane and it took
the stewardesses the two or three hours of the flight just to serve the
luncheon. I ate heartily, although I don't remember what I ate.

Feeling that I was now an experienced air traveller, I left England on a
Pan Am two-class plane a few weeks later. It cost 75 pounds to fly and
95 to take the ship, and that did not include tax or tips to the
omnipresent stewards, two for each table, two for each cabin, one for
the library, one for the deck, etc. When they have cafeteria style and
dormitory on ships, I will revert to sea voyage, but until then, for the
aforementioned reasons, I plan to take future long trips by plane.

We arrived at the airport in good time for our flight but had to wait
about three hours--a slowdown, one of the others travellers said, after
we heard that a half a dozen other flights had been delayed. The waiting
room was so commodious and it was so interesting to see all the
families, whose children crawled happily about under foot, that I quite
enjoyed the delay. And the flight itself was unbelievably beautiful,
sailing as we were above the clouds, looking down over another world, of
hills and mountains and deep valleys and even craters, all tinted rose
and golden and deep purple, inspiring a great awe and thankfulness in
the beholder, to the Creator of heaven and earth. "The world will be
saved by beauty," Dostoevsky says in **The Idiot**. And certainly
beauty lifts the mind and heart to God. Coming down to refuel over
Gander, in Newfoundland, the dark wild tundra laid out below us was
broken up by sky-reflecting streams and lakes. All around the horizon
were the remains of the sunset, a rainbow band as far as the eye could
see, that faded quickly into the dark of night.

To get back to England--The first meeting in England was at a Friends
Hall, and was the Pax annual meeting, where Archbishop Thomas J.
Roberts, S.J. was to speak. He arrived late and left early, being on his
way to a dinner meeting. He was full of energy when he arrived, having
just left a peace vigil in front of St. Martin in the Fields, across
from Hyde Park, where the peace groups, including a number from the Pax
Society, had been standing in the rain a good part of the afternoon.
Prayer goes with a vigil, and the Archbishop told us delightedly that
the nuclear-armed submarine, the blessing of which was being protested
by the group, had stuck in the mud after being launched and had to poise
there in ingominy until the tide came in and floated it off. The tides
had not obeyed King Canute!

The Archbishop told of a delightful assignment he had received: to act
as chaplain on a former troop ship which used to carry thirty thousand
men. Troops are now transported by air, he explained, and with the
breakup of the British Empire, a new use has been found for the ships.
They are turned into floating schools, with dormitories for school
children. The trip he is taking will be along the west coast of Africa,
with a chance to stop at all the countries along the way. Amid-ships, in
what used to be officers' quarters, instructors and their families can
be accommodated.

David Cohen
-----------

It was on a bitterly cold Sunday afternoon that David Cohen came to the
Gresham Hotel, near the British Museum, to pick up: Eileen and me to
take us to tea in the East End, where he lives. Here was an entirely
contrasting section of London. We took the bus through the quiet Sunday
afternoon streets, and during our subsequent walk David was most anxious
that we see some of the ancient synagogues in the East End. David is a
Jewish scholar, and in addition to working for a living, spends nights
at meetings and searching scripture to find all the parts of the Old
Testament that foretell the coming of the Messiah and the evolution of
the rites of the Catholic Church from Jewish tradition. He brought out
page after page of manuscript as we sat at the kitchen table in his
little three-room flat on Thrawl Street, eating sandwiches and drinking
hot tea to keep warm. There was not a bit of heat in this old housing,
which had been considered most comfortable when it was put up by the
Rothschilds perhaps a century ago. That afternoon we saw Petticoat Lane,
where there are push carts and an open air market every Sunday morning.
We passed Toynbee Hall, named after Arnold Toynbee, "who died in the
prime of his youth in 1883 while engaged in lecturing on political
economy to the working men of London."

Commonweal Library
------------------

While on my way to Taena Community, my bus took me to Cheltenham,
Gloucester, where I was invited to meet David Hoggett, a young man who
was paralyzed from injuries received in a fall while he was working with
the International Voluntary Service groups of students. He has been flat
on his back ever since, and has the use of only one hand and arm, but he
can type, and he runs a free rental library which is kept down to room
size by being very selective. The books deal with non-violence,
community, the common good, peacemaking and social change. You can get a
catalogue by writing to the Commonweal Collection, 112 Winchcombe
Street, Cheltenham, Glos., England. "Normally the library pays the cost
of dispatch, and the borrower, that of returning the book . . . But no
one should be hindered for financial reasons from borrowing, and if
necessary stamps for return postage will be sent with the book." We have
contributed a few books to his library and I have borrowed a few of
Danilo Dolci's which I could not afford to buy here.

Such valiant service warms the heart. I know of another bedridden person
who carries on an apostolate by using her arms for working, and her
crippled hands for writing, not only letters but articles.

And here I have exhausted my space for this month, have still not
reached the Taena community, and will have to end, **to be continued.**
Perhaps I can persuade the Taena people to supplement my brief account
next month, with a communication of their own.

Archbishop Roberts
------------------

We had a delightful visit with the Archbishop later, at the Jesuit
church of the Immaculate Conception, at Farm Street. This is a
hundred-year-old parish, and the church reminded me of St. Francis
Xavier's on Sixteenth Street, in New York. The parish house of the Farm
St. church is large, with meeting rooms for lectures, and rooms for
consultation with the fathers. Archbishop Roberts meets people from
morning till night while he is in residence, and I take it that he is
treated just like any other member of the staff, despite his
ecclesiastical rank. The American Embassy was nearby, but we did not
stop to demonstrate our feelings about the Vietnam War.

----------------

We wish to go on record as fully supporting Dr. Benjamin Spock and all
others in their efforts to aid and abet those young men facing
conscription and opposing the War in Vietnam.

Dorothy Day
