% On Pilgrimage - June 1968
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, June 1968, 1, 2.

*Summary: A series of diary-like entries describing protests in New York
regarding peace, race, and the closing of Sydenham Hospital.
Interspersed are events of friends, including the confirmation of Peggy
Baird and a wedding at the farm. Reports on plans for the summer,
including a speaking engagement at the Pax conference and attendance at
the Poor People's Campaign protests in Washington, DC. (DDLW \#865).*

One use of these columns is to give news of all the members of the
Catholic Worker family to all the readers who have been closely
associated with us over the years. I will begin with April 27, the day
the last issue of the **CW** was delivered to the St. Joseph's House at
175 Chrystie Street to be mailed out. On that Saturday afternoon there
were three parades. One was the Loyalty Day parade, another a Peace
parade of many organizations which came down Fifth Avenue from east and
west sides of Central Park and converged on the Sheep Meadow; the third
was a protestors parade which began at Washington Square and without
permit attempted a march, which was stopped by the police. One would not
have expected our new Archbishop to walk, or head this third parade, but
how nice it would have been, if he had joined what one might call
ecumenically "his flock" in the Sheep Meadow! Past popes have spoken of
the fallacy of an armed peace so we would not have had him march in a
Preparedness Day parade. But since this was a Loyalty Day parade, he
could have rightly appeared at both. Enrico Malatesta, the famous
Italian anarchist, used to urge his friends and followers to rightly
love their country, and in their loyalty do all they could to work for
freedom and justice there, as well as in the entire world.

Arthur Sheehan, one of our editors, walked in the peace parade and
suffered a heart attack the next morning. He had been helping us in the
new house, coming each morning at eight o'clock to wait for inspectors
and workers, and leaving at noon when someone else came to spell him. I
visited him at Jacobi Hospital, which is new and spacious, and was
delighted to find him recovering. He is now resting at his home on City
Island where he can be written to: Box 25 City Island N.Y. 10464. Arthur
has always lived in voluntary poverty, so if anyone wants to send a
gift, let it be in cash, to pay rent for some of those little delicacies
needed by the sick. (St. Francis called for some sweet cakes in his last
illness.)

**Sunday, April 28th**

Attilio Cantori and his wife and child came for the day and we had a
delightful concert of flute, guitar and banjo, and singing too. Joe and
Audrey Monroe had their guitars, so it was a delightful day. Deane
Mowrer taped an interview with Joe, who has been a leader in the black
protest in Harlem against Columbia's getting part of Morningside Park
for their new gymnasium and depriving the local people of much needed
park space. The student rebellion made this protest part of their
demonstrations and sit-ins which went on through the month. Black
students occupied Hamilton Hall and the Harlem group brought hot meals
to them, adding the peaceful works of mercy to the sometimes violent
struggle which was going on.

Joe is also demonstrating and speaking at meetings opposing the closing
of Sydenham Hospital, which is so much needed in Harlem. Shutting off of
Medicaid and the closing of the smaller hospitals is inflicting great
hardship on the poorest.

Let us hope that in future issues we will report more of the students'
revolts. We have too few writers among our editors and co-workers. It is
not only injustice to the blacks, corruption in the city, but
cooperation with government research for war, and relations with
administration that are being discussed in many other colleges and
universities too. A happy note was struck when it was announced that
classes one bright day would be held on the lawn and under the trees
with cooperating faculty, and workers, employees and neighbors were all
invited.

**May 5th and 6th.**

Went to see the movie, **War and Peace**, with William Oleksak, who has
helped me by clipping Washington, Detroit and New York papers for many
years, keeping track of affairs in Latin America, the peace movement and
among the agricultural workers. The most beautiful scene in the picture
is Prince Andre's drive through the woods, when he sees the old oak
tree, seemingly dead, when all the young trees around him were covered
with spring growth. The tree reflects his melancholy. Then after his
overhearing Natasha's springtime, midnight soliloquy from her balcony,
he leaves next day and retracing his journey finds the old tree bursting
into fresh leaf. Helene Iswolsky, our Russian scholar in residence at
Tivoli and I both liked those beautiful rural scenes and were exhausted
by the hours of battle, Austerlitz on Sunday and Borodino on Monday, the
spectacle of tens of thousands of French and Russian soldiers mowed down
in that brutal invasion, an invasion duplicated in this century also,
and a slaughter which brought home to us what was going on at that very
moment in Vietnam.

Undoubtedly the picture will make us go back to reread Tolstoi's
masterpiece.

**May 12. Sunday.**

Happy news. Peggy Baird (to use her maiden name) is taking instruction
from Fr. Charles to be received into the Catholic Church. She was
baptized a Presbyterian as a baby. On hearing the news, Malcolm Cowley,
a former husband, came to see her, "clothed and in her right mind" as my
mother used to say, surrounded by her kittens and flowers and books, and
studying the Baltimore catechism, of all things! I heard that WBAI in a
recent auction to raise funds for a new headquarters was given a
Baltimore catechism to auction off as an antique. Myself, I am reading
the Dutch catechism with much joy, beginning with the chapter on the
resurrection and Pentecost.

**May 13-May 19**

A delightful visit to Perkinsville, what with Eric, 19, home for ten
days from Fort Jackson, South Carolina. Delightful in that it is spring,
good weather, the children all well and healthy and playing out all day,
and sorrowful in that Eric is in the army, right now transferred to Fort
Benning, where he will be until November. Then a last leave, and then
shipping out. Where, God knows. At Tivoli, Mr. Moore's son was sent to
Ethiopia. Mrs. de Ruyter's grandson has spent his entire time at Fort
Knox and will be out of the service in September.

Tamar and I picked dandelion greens and rhubarb and walked in the
garden, and we had milk from a neighbor's goats and maple syrup from
Hilaire's labor in the spring, and I rested and was relaxed although the
house was bulging just as Tivoli always is, with young of all ages. One
woke up to find them sleeping on the dining room floor too.

**May 20.**

A wedding at the farm, Will Gilbert and Laura, witnessed by Fr. Rogers,
Episcopalian minister up the hill. Cake was baked by Joan Welch and
music was supplied by three youths, two of them from Bard college, I
understand, who were so covered with hair as to head and face that only
a little circle of face appeared, and very bright eyes. They played
recorder, drum, banjo and guitar, and at first they looked like the Huns
of the old sagas who descended like wolves on the fold, but their music
was gentle and so were they, and before they left I had come to think of
them as more like the followers of St. Francis than of Alaric. Who
knows, St. Francis might have been just as hairy, shabby in his
shepherd's tunic and bare feet. Marge Hughes let fall the word Hobbit,
and one of the youths turned out to be an enthusiastic reader of the
Tolkien books. (Tolkien, by the way, is listed as one of the translators
of the Jerusalem Bible.)

**June first.**

Peggy Baird received into the Church by Fr. Hickey, Redemptorist from
Esopus, across the river, Fr. Charles being absent at a retreat house.
Visitors poured in this weekend, Malcolm, Muriel, Sue Brown, Betsy--Lou
and Justine Murphy from Detroit (Deane taped an interview with them) and
all the others that I am sure Deane has listed.

And now I sit each day in the new house, in New York, and there are so
many visitors who wish to see it that I am not catching up with my
correspondence yet. And there is no time to write more about resistance
and non-resistance about which I am going to speak at the Pax conference
this summer. Let us hope that in the next issue I shall report that we
are moving into the new house and settled down to a more disciplined
life of work. We are working, Peter Maurin used to say, "for that kind
of a society where it is easier for people to be good."

We are hoping to go on the June 19th demonstration with all the other
peace groups to Washington, to show our support for the Poor People's
Campaign. Jack Cook meant to go to Washington to write about
Resurrection City, but the condition of our own destitute kept him at
home. Maybe when the flood of summer volunteers come, we can help more.
