% Reflections on Thanksgiving
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, 1936, 1939, 1941, 1945

*Summary: A selection of texts on the theme of thanksgiving. (DDLW
\#869).*

Dorothy Day held a deep gratitude for all things, even tribulation,
which sprang from her deep conviction of God's love for the earth itself
and all the people on it. She possessed a visceral knowledge of and
thankfulness for God's providence. God gave gifts abundantly; all is
gift.

["Notes By The Way - September
1945"](daytext.cfm?TextID=414&SearchTerm=thanksgiving)   DOC \#414

**Summary:** Describes the celebrations taking place in New York City
following the announcement of the end of the Second World War. Writes
about pilgrimages and their pilgrimage in **thanksgiving** for peace as
well as in penance for having used the atomic bomb--a ten mile walk in
the city at night accompanied by song and prayer. Gives accolades for
the cooks, the volunteers at the farm, and those in the city.

["Day After Day - November
1941"](daytext.cfm?TextID=376&SearchTerm=thanksgiving)   DOC \#376

**Summary:** Renews opposition to peacetime conscription and urges
readers to write the government, talk about it at meetings, and pray and
do penance--"This program is open to us all." Enrolls her daughter in a
"domestic science" school in Montreal. Includes a canticle of
**thanksgiving** about little beauties in the city.

["Thanksgiving Dinner and Other
Things"](daytext.cfm?TextID=351&SearchTerm=thanksgiving)   DOC \#351

**Summary:** Describes their **Thanksgiving** feast. Despite the fact
that donations were sparse, all enjoy a filling, yet sober, celebration.
Notes the beginning of Advent and thoughts of feasting turn to fasting.
Describes her speaking tour of New England, meditates on the virtues of
manual labor, and reminds her readers that the truckmen of Burlington
are suffering real privation during their strike.

["Day After Day - November
1936"](daytext.cfm?TextID=307&SearchTerm=thanksgiving)   DOC \#307

**Summary:** Reflections on our being children of one Father,
**thanksgiving**, the worth of spreading the "Christian revolution" by
distributing the *Catholic Worker* paper, distributing clothes, and
other stories of life on Mott Street.
