%*The Eleventh Virgin*
% Dorothy Day

Part One, Chapter 1
---

Every few months Mother Grace and the children's father had a house
party and that meant the horse-chestnut tree in the back garden would
have an outcropping of nickels and dimes. They grew in the branches and
were hidden among the leaves and twigs around the trunk. The boys could
climb for them, but June had to burrow around the roots of the tree. She
was only four then . . .

There was a convenient ledge all around underneath the kitchen table
where the children ate supper and they hid their crusts there. Sometimes
they were able to slip away unsuspected from the supper table and
sometimes Mary Milady, the "girl," went around and scooped up the crusts
and made them eat them before they went out to play "run, sheepy, run."
The disadvantage of that was that the crusts got mixed up and one had to
eat them indiscriminately. June being a finicky child much preferred to
eat her own . . .

Sadie Spielberger, whose mother kept a grocery store at the end of the
block, used to lure June into the little corn field at the back of the
house and while the two of them hid among the sweet smelling
corn-stalks, told June things which were very interesting but which June
felt that she ought not to know. There was an agreeable excitement in
listening to Sadie, excitement akin to that stomach-aching thrill when
one was going to the circus.

But Sadie died from eating an Easter egg which had served as a parlor
ornament for ten years. It was made of sugar and by squinting through
one end, June could see a cow and a milkmaid and green trees. Sadie's
death, June felt, was the result of delving too deeply into life's
secrets . . .

There was a brook running through the vacant lot across the street, and
June and her sister Adele used to sit on the stones and try to turn
hairs from a horse's tail into water-snakes, holding the long hairs
patiently in the water, waiting for the heads to grow on them as you
were told they did. Concentration made Adele dizzy and she fell in the
water and went home howling. June was whipped for it because, as Mother
Grace argued, June was two years older and should have known better.
That was one of the disadvantages of playing with one's sister.

June was slapped for many things. For going to the ice-box and dipping
her fingers into the condensed milk can. Two fingers could scoop up a
lot . . .

At the end of the summer the weeds in the lot grew so high that June
could tunnel her way through them, making large green-roofed caves here
and there. One of the boys let her share his cave with him and some
afternoons when the others weren't around, he took her in his arms and
kissed her, pressing himself up against her. He was one of the big boys,
fourteen, and when June was allowed to play with a boy of his age who
was captain of the "run, sheepy, run" team which always won, she felt
that she should be glad that he wanted to hug her. But there was
wickedness in it. It was exciting.

June was eight then, and at school, during recess, the girls joined
hands and formed a circle and sang:

*"Water, water wine-flower,*

*Growing up so high.*

*We are all young ladies*

*And we are sure to die.*

**

*All excepting Ju-une,*

*She is the fairest flower.*

*Fie for shame, fie for shame,*

*Turn around and tell your beau's name."*

It wasn't always June of course who was the "fairest flower." Sometimes
whole days passed before she was called upon to be one. It gave her a
secret thrill to name the captain of the "run, sheepy, run" team. His
name was Harvey. Then the girls joined hands again and sang:

*"Harvey--Harvey's a nice young man,*

*Comes to the door with his hat in his hand.*

*Takes off his gloves and shows her the ring,*

*Tomorrow, tomorrow the wedding will begin.*

**

*"Harvey's sick and ready to die,*

*That will make poor Ju-une cry,*

*Oh June, Oh June, don't you cry,*

*He'll be better by and by."*

Not long after this was a great upheaval. The Henreddy family moved to
the city where there were no vacant lots and brooks and houses with wide
lawns around them. Instead there was a long tenement which stretched the
entire length of a block. There were stores downstairs and above there
were five-room flats and back of each flat there was a porch as big as a
room. Each porch had a gate to it, and when June went outside the gate,
there was a long passageway down which she could walk, staring in at the
other porches--some of them with geraniums, and nasturtiums in boxes
nailed to the railing, and swings hanging in the middle of the porches .
. .

For lunch there was always potato soup and for supper there were
bananas, bread and butter and jelly and tea. June didn't like tea and
she didn't like jelly. And she didn't like being sent after the bananas.
"Get dead ripe ones," her mother always said. "They ought to be only ten
cents a dozen." And Mother Grace told her if she couldn't get them for
ten cents in one place to go on to the next . . .

There was housework to do. Wiping dishes and sometimes washing. Wiping
up the floor, and worst of all, dusting. After June and Adele read the
story of Polly Pepper from the Sunday School library, there was more
fascination in housework. June even polished the faucets of the kitchen
sink.

Once there was a terrible scene. Mother Grace picked up dishes one by
one and slammed them on the floor. Mr. Henreddy got behind her and tried
to hold her and kept saying, "Grace, now Grace dear."

June and Adele were making valentines--the next day they were going to
get up early and distribute them to the other children around the
porches--and they sat with gaudy bits of paper in their hands and
whimpered as the smashing continued. Dan hustled them into the bedroom
and made them go down on their knees and pray. Dave wouldn't pray. He
just sat with white lips and pretended to go on reading.

Afterwards when it was over and Mother Grace was weak and shaking on the
bed, Mr. Henreddy sent out for ice-cream for the children, but June
refused to eat hers. It was too terrible an evening to think of eating
ice-cream. She sat and wept. Wept for her mother, and for her father
because he was so pathetic in his efforts to comfort them. And because
ice-cream, generally considered a treat, made the tragedy more poignant.

The next day Mother Grace made a terse remark about losing her nerve and
no more was said about it. June had a hideous feeling of shame and
bitterness in her heart, but she did not blame her mother for a minute.
Mother Grace was brave as a general rule. She had a sweet habit of
"dressing up" in the afternoon. Not that she wasn't neat and tidy in her
pleasant house dresses in the morning. But on cleaning days when the
floors had to be scrubbed or after a hard morning in the common laundry
in the basement of the tenement, Mother Grace was exceptionally dainty.

June loved to watch and help; to prepare the hot bath with just a drop
of cologne, for Mother Grace couldn't afford bath salts; to lay out the
towels and the treasured silk kimono with storks and flowers embroidered
on it. And afterwards to keep Adele quietly amused on the back porch
while Mother Grace napped for fifteen minutes. She seldom allowed
herself more for there was always sewing and mending to do in the
afternoon.

It was a special treat to be allowed to help at the dressing, to brush
out the long twist of hair.

"Oh dear, oh dear, won't it *ever* get all grey," she often said. It was
beautifully white around her face and she was proud of it, for she was
only thirty. "I've heard say that you could have your hair whitened, but
I doubt it. There--that's enough for the brushing of it. Just see if I
get all the little hairs tucked-in in back, dear. The hand-glass,
please. If it won't curl, it's got to stay tucked. Women who let their
hair straggle on the back of their necks, add ten years to their age--"
this denunciation of the careless woman coming through several hairpins
which Mother Grace kept in readiness in her mouth to tuck some more.

It was fun to powder her round neck and dimpled shoulder blades and
still more fun to watch her with the pinkish, smelly powder for her face
and the little dabs of rouge for cheeks and the lobes of her ears.

There was a deep sigh of pleasure for her improved appearance and always
the emphatic statement that she felt a hundred times better already.

The toilet was completed when violet perfume was applied delicately to
eye-brows and behind the ears, and as a reward for services rendered, to
the flat bosom of June's frock.

This afternoon's toilet always brought back the smiley corners to Mother
Grace's lips and eyes.

But in times of unusual stress, when the rent had to be paid and there
was no money to pay it, or when Mr. Henreddy had been hypercritical
about the breakfast set before him and had stamped around and made the
atmosphere blue, there was relief to be found in what Mother Grace
termed "dissipation."

June was sent down the street to spend fifteen cents on a bottle of
ginger ale and the sewing that afternoon would be accompanied by sips of
ginger ale high-ball.

"Will you have just a taste of 'oh-be-joyful' in your ginger ale?"
Mother would say gayly, and June would have a thimbleful added, not
because she liked the taste, but because she liked to feel grown-up and
companionable. And the warm feeling produced was very pleasant, too.

Whenever Mother Grace referred to whiskey as "oh-be-joyful" she'd sigh,
"dear old Uncle Charlie," and there would follow stories about him and
his whaling vessel and his ice-boat on the Hudson and when Mother was a
little girl. To which little June listened with absorbed attention--so
absorbed, indeed, that she could not darn more than two holes in the
afternoon.

One of the little girls whom June played with was called "Cathern" and
was a most intimate friend. She had ten dolls "up in the closet" and
that phrase typified everything delightful to June. Once she wistfully
asked Mother Grace if she didn't have a doll "up in the closet" for her.
"Damn that stingy Hall woman," said her mother, and then scolded June
for letting Mrs. Hall know that she wanted a doll by looking wistfully
at Catherine's.

But she took two towels nevertheless and in some miraculous way with
cotton and clothespins and crayons and scraps, made dolls of fascinating
character and expression. And for mouths there were button-holed slits,
very conveniently opened for "nippy bottles" which you could buy at the
store for two cents. "Cathern" had nothing like them.

There were other things that Mother Grace did. When she noticed that
"Cathern" and her sister "Gwadys" often had tea-parties in the afternoon
(exclusive tea-parties to which no one was invited) she scrubbed the
sooty back porch and put out a carpet and table and chairs and there
suddenly appeared a surprise party of oatmeal cookies and cocoa molasses
candy. And this was an exceptional party, for she invited not only
Cathern and Gwadys (with intent to heap coals of fire perhaps) but six
others beside.

And when Dave and Dan joined the choir and went away for a week's
vacation in a camp there was an evening treat for the girls every night.
Sometimes it was ice-cream and sometimes it was moving pictures and when
it was ice-cream, Mother Grace divided the pitcherful (it was now ten
cents worth) into three equal parts, but somehow she could never finish
hers.

"A little goes a long way," she assured them, and then there was an
extra portion to divide.

Mary was one of the porch children and the eldest of nine. She was a
Catholic, and she told June of the mysteries of her religion and her
saints one evening after the supper dishes were done, and before the
smaller children had to be put to bed. The gleaming stars glimpsed
through the network of porches, the soft warm night, and the dusky
odorous alley made her disclosures all the more impressive. She also
gave June the story of a saint to read, with the result that thereafter
June prayed to Pelagia, her birthday saint, every time a whipping
threatened. It didn't avert the punishment, but her faith remained
unshaken. Were the saints ever saved from the caldrons of boiling oil by
their prayers?

One hot night, when the hurdy-gurdies were playing in the street, and
the call of the "hot tamale" man and the voices of the passersby kept
the night alive, Adele stuck her elbow in June ribs.

"Tell me a story so's I kin get to sleep," she demanded.

"Won't!" June replied. "I'm thinkin'."

"All right for you. I'll tell Mother how you went swimmin' again with
the boys after she told you not to."

"All right, then, I'll make an old witch's face at you and scare you."

"I'll tell Mother on you for that too. Are y'gonna tell me a story?"
threateningly.

A whipping had lost its novelties and much of its terror for June. She
was about to pull her sister's hair when she thought of St. Pelagia and
a new game they hadn't played. Adele snuggled her hot face against her
shoulder and breathed on her neck while June narrated the trials and
struggles of the early saints.

"So you see," she mumbled in conclusion, "if you ever expect to get to
heaven, we've got to begin trying that stuff now. They all slept on the
floor and hard boards and the stone floors of prison cells and ate
nothing but bread and water. I don't know what you're going to do, but
I'm going to sleep on the floor tonight."

"You ain't gonna be the only martyr. Me too."

For weeks after that their bedroom at night was transformed into a bare
cell, and to their glowing imaginations, visions of St. Pelagia and the
Virgin with her little Christ child hovered around. And every night the
smell of beer and whiskey came up in waves from the saloon below, and
the Drunken Lady who lived in the flat above fell into bed and snorted
and groaned with the heat all night.

And then they moved away from the tenement and for a time life lost its
poignancy.


