% The Eleventh Virgin
% Dorothy Day

Part Three, Chapter 1
---

Mother Grace thought that it would be tactless to show her enthusiasm
for what June was about to do. If she showed the happiness she felt, she
thought it would reveal to June her disapproval of what her daughter had
done before.

“As for those three boys, Hugh and Daniel and Kenneth—they’re perfect
dears. And the apartment is a lovely one. I don’t blame you for
preferring it to a furnished room,” she had said. “Of course your
friends think nothing of it and neither do their friends. But think of
the world. Not your world, I suppose, but my world. If any of my friends
ask ‘where’s June living now’ and I say, nonchalantly, ‘with three men
over on Waverly Place’—what do you suppose they’ll think? Not that I’m
likely to answer them in any such way.”

She wrinkled her eyebrows considerably over the jail episode and June
noticed the little pucker of worry with remorse. “I am a brute,” she
thought, “to make her worry so.” And she continued to fret over the
inconsequentiality of her life. “Am I going to continue frittering my
time away?”

As for the youngest member of the family, he gloated over his sister’s
recent confinement. He sat on the front steps and informed all the
children in the neighborhood of it. “My sister’s been to jail,” he
boasted.

“We mustn’t talk of June in front of Glubb,” Mother Grace told Adele in
despair. “He only goes out and repeats it to the children and they take
the news home to their families. They think I’m the most unnatural
mother, not to take better care of my children.”

And then June came with a letter to show her mother, applying for
admittance to the city hospital. Her mother hid her approval as
carefully as she hid her disapproval and asked her if she was about to
become patriotic.

“Not a bit of it,” said June indignantly. I don’t believe in war and I
really think that if women united and refused to bear children to fight
wars or to take care of the wounded as long as there are wars we’d never
have any more fighting. But I hate being Utopian and trying to escape
from reality. And now that there is war and so much work to be done, I
might as well try to do some of it instead of sitting around playing at
writing book reviews and helping edit magazines that are on the verge of
suppression. That’s the only kind of a job that I’m fit for . . . . And
I’ve had enough of newspaper work. I’d be sacrificing principles to work
on the capitalist press even if I could get a job on one of the New York
papers which I can’t. And if I’m going to sacrifice the foolish little
principles that I have in looking forward to an ideal state, I might as
well sacrifice them by doing work that has to be done in a hospital.”

“I don’t know what in the world you are talking about when you say you
are sacrificing principle to enter a hospital,” said Mother Grace. “But
you always have to have some high-flown reason for what you do, I
suppose.”

“I expect I don’t know what I mean, either,” June agreed amiably. “I
just know that I don’t believe in war and that by entering a hospital I
am doing my share in the war.

“At any rate, the prospectus of the training school calls for six pink
uniforms (that’s what probationers wear and I look like hell in pink)
and a dozen aprons. Will you stake me to the money to buy them? I’m
broke.”

\*

“By the way, Mother Grace,” said Adele, not long afterward. “Do you
realize that I’m eighteen?”

“Goodness gracious, so you are. I guess it’s about time that you began
to talk of living your own life and getting out in the world.” And they
smiled to each other as they often did when they were making pleasant
fun of June.

“I know what you’re thinking of,” said June. “You want to enter the
hospital with me.”

“You’ve still got Glubb,” and Adele looked at her mother appealingly.
“I’ve got to do something, some time. And they need nurses so badly now.
Not to go abroad, but to stay at home and serve in the hospitals here.
The Red Cross is full and they haven’t sent abroad anywhere near all the
nurses they have in reserve. They just sit around doing nothing or
parade Fifth Avenue while they wait to get across. And meantime the
hospitals are terribly hard up for help.”

Mother Grace had long expected her youngest daughter to realize her
eighteen years. Since the hospital the two girls wished to enter was
within twenty minutes’ ride of home, it was easier to give up the last
of her grown ups than she had thought possible.

It was decided that the two should begin training after Christmas and
many afternoons were spent in making pink dresses and voluminous white
aprons.

“I did not dream bed-making could be so hard,” Adele sighed at the end
of the first day and stretched her lame body luxuriously. “If it weren’t
for you being here, I’d want to cry and go straight home. How many times
did you have to put the bottom sheet on your bed? I didn’t get mine
right until the tenth time.”

“I did mine satisfactorily the seventh,” June laughed. “But then I’m two
years older than you are, so I can’t help being smarter.”

Bed-making was a difficult job. First you whisked the mattress—away from
you lest you get a germ on your clean white apron—and turned it and
whisked some more. Then you whisked a carbolic solution over each side
of the mattress and washed the remainder of the bed till there wasn’t a
speck of dust on it. You did this to six beds before you returned to the
beginning of the line to make the first one.

The sheets were folded in a certain way so that they could be unfolded
and spread out on the bed in a certain way. There was no flapping open
as you did at home with a sheet or table-cloth to spread it smoothly.
That might disturb germs that were in the air and set them in
circulation.

After the sheet was smoothed out on the bed, you tucked in one side,
tucking with broad sweeps from the middle. Then you went around to the
other side and the sheet was so wide that when you tucked it there, you
tucked that side so that it fitted into the other, as an envelop flap
fits inside of an envelope. At either end what was left over of the
sheet on the under side of the mattress was inserted under the sheet on
the upper side of the mattress, was folded to form a flap and pinned
carefully and neatly with two straight pins to the mattress. There was a
certain way of putting in the pins too. You see what a difficult job it
was.

And you see also what June and Adele meant when they said they had to
make the bed seven and ten times before the head nurse was satisfied. It
was very discouraging to put the sheet on to the best of your ability
and then have the head nurse come along and point out several wrinkles.
Wrinkles, it would seem, were very irritating to sick people.

When you had been told to try again, off the sheet had to come. Not
quickly. You didn’t just take out the pins and pull the sheet off and
begin laboriously to put it on again. No, it had to be folded as it was
taken off, and unfolded again to put it on. So many times that you could
never forget how hospital linen was folded.

Making a bed, June decided, was much more difficult than writing a book
review, and her satisfaction when her bed had been made for the seventh
time and approved was much greater than she had enjoyed when seeing a
book review in print with her name signed to it.

June and Adele worked in an empty ward. A wide door opened into another
ward from which every now and then came the hot, sharp cry of a patient.
It was good to be working there. There was even a strange satisfaction
in hearing a patient cry because when the cries were stilled you knew
that something useful had been done.

Miss Kelley was the probationers’ instructor. She was a little
white-faced nurse with prim firm ways. Her eyes were large and intensely
serious, the color of an ocean on a dull winter day. Her hair was mouse
colored. She was sweetly firm and could be very forceful. June heard her
voice from behind a screen, calming an hysterical patient. “Turn right
over on your side now and let the nurse attend to you! The idea of your
making all this trouble!” There was quiet immediately.

There was the same insistence in the touch of her hands. She was not
strong but she could move the helpless bulk of a woman who weighed three
times as much as she did. Strength seemed to pour from her fingertips
into a patient.

When, after several days of bed-making, June gave her first morning
toilet, she felt that it was an event and an accomplishment. Before you
could give a morning toilet, you had to be given a tray with many
bottles and sponges and toilet articles on it. Trays were fascinating
with the little jars of salve and swabs and bandages and liquid green
soap and mouth wash—many more things. You had to go over your tray every
morning to see that the other nurses did not steal things from it.

June’s first patient was an old Canadian woman, ninety-four years old.
Granny objected to being washed saying that she had been bathed the day
before and that at her time of life she did not see why she had to be
pestered with soap and water the way she was. Argument was useless so
she began to kick and fight, clawing at June with bird-like hands.

Another nurse said, “Can’t you see, Granny, that Miss Henreddy only
wants to make you comfortable? She does it because she loves you.”

“Love be damned,” said Granny, loudly, stridently. Her defiance was
glorious, June thought, and she laughed joyfully as she put her hands
under the armpits of the old lady and tried to persuade her to lie down.
In the scuffle the bedclothes had been heaped in the middle of the bed.
Granny perched there, sitting on the end of her spine, her arms clasped
about her bare and scrawny knees and blazed at June with eyes as dark as
those of a baby. Her cap hung over one ear, displaying a large bald spot
surrounded by a queer fringe of grey hair which was matted and awry,
standing up like a field of ferns. She gave way to June at last and
allowed herself to be bathed, crying to herself all the while like a
whimpering monkey. The ghastly youthfulness of her false teeth in her
yellow shrivelled face haunted June for the rest of the day.

“She has been crying for months,” another nurse told June, “to be
allowed to wear a wig which was taken away from her when she entered the
hospital. She says she wouldn’t feel half so badly with it. I wish they
would let her have it.”

There were two women dying in the ward, a woman of fifty and a girl of
twenty-two. Mary Adams was slowly fading from the whiteness of the ward
around her into a grey shadow on the long slim bed. She had a grown son
who came to visit her every evening when the wards were twilit and the
evening toilets were completed. He brought huge bunches of flowers which
the head nurse vaguely disapproved of. “They are too flary.” But the
orchids suited her somber eyes and the mint and old-fashioned flowers
made a strange rich scent around the bed, Every time June passed her, a
little thrill ran up and down her spine. Mrs. Adams never spoke but lay
there motionless, looking out of wide open grey eyes, looking at the
death she saw so plainly with dull wonder.

Irene was the girl and she was pathetically young. Her finely shaped
mouth was always contorted with pain and there was a fierce protesting
light in her eyes. The lines that agony had drawn in the ivory of her
skin were like those of passion. She might have been clutching a lover
in a last embrace knowing that when he arose from the bed he would go
out and close the door forever.

“There is the smell of death around her,” June thought, “and no one
brings her flowers to deaden it.”

When Adele was working in a ward where there were six girls who were
about to have their tonsils taken out, June was passed on to the
fracture ward, number twenty-five. There were eleven old ladies there
with fractures of the femur and hip bones. The most youthful of them
were sixty and close on to seventy years. They approached the elderly
stage when they were eighty and when they passed ninety-five, it was
admitted that they were indeed old.

It seemed strange at first to call them by their Christian names but it
was the custom of the hospital and June soon became used to it.

Ida, a young Jewish woman of sixty, was a trial to June. It seemed she
had never known the meaning of the word bath and when she was washed on
her arrival she howled so that a young interne rushed in thinking that
she had been taken with labor pains. Her features were colossal, well
carved and wrinkled like a crumpled linen handkerchief. She had become
so used to contorting every feature to give vent to her emotions that
now her face was as uncontrolled as that of a six year old child.

Every morning June had to bathe her from head to foot, rub her back with
alcohol, powder her and comb her hair. And soon Ida was so accustomed to
being waited on that although she was no longer helpless, she wailed
loudly if any detail of her morning toilet was omitted.

“Schmeer! Mit alcohol!” she demanded, arching her back from the bed. She
could not turn, owing to the splint which bound her on one side from her
shoulder to her ankle.

Her sensuous joy was so great that all the while she was being groomed
and curried, she grunted like an enormous pig. Before she had been in
the ward a week, she demanded that each leg, each arm, be also rubbed
with alcohol.

Occasionally, the ward maid, Catherine, “did” her morning toilet, and to
avoid the boisterous argument which Ida always indulged in and to save
the alcohol, she took to rubbing her arms and legs with a weak solution
of thymol and water. Ida soon discovered the deception and seizing the
bottle, she dashed it on the floor. After that she could no longer be
deceived. Before she allowed herself to be rubbed, she smelled the
contents of the bottle.

Although she was physically clean, thanks to June’s efforts, her habits
remained filthy. On visiting days, she furtively accepted the food which
her relatives brought her, and which was not supposed to be left at the
bedside of the patient, and hid it under her mattress, her pillow, under
her arms, and even between her splint and her body under the bandages.
Then knowing that she had only a few hours before she would again be
bathed, she applied herself assiduously to the food which was brought to
her until every crumb was devoured. “Ei, ei, gevault, gevault, gevault,”
she complained if anyone tried to take her food away from her.

Usually her relatives, who came in tribes and draped themselves around
the bed to ei-gevault with her over the miseries of the world, brought
her prunes. They came in quart jars, twice a week, and after drinking
all the juice out of the bottle, Ida munched the prunes all night,
eating them as continually and with as unalloyed delight as a debutante
would salted almonds.

There were times in the sweet dusk of evening when she had been
“schmeered” with alcohol to her heart’s content that she showed a
gentler side. Her ei-gevaults gave way to a melancholy chanting, a
chanting that was also joyous. One time when she was softly and
exultantly wailing, June asked another Jewish woman in the ward what she
was singing about. The reply was that she was “talking to God.”

There was another in the ward who was almost as much trouble as
“Ei-gevault.” The nurse called her “Oh-a, Oh-a” because she cried
continually. She was the one Irishwoman there who did not bear her pains
stoically. Approaching death had loosened the bolts she had placed on
her consciousness. Although she was seventy, she had a beautiful body,
as white and firm as that of a young girl. She paid for her delicacy
however, for every inch of her was alive to sensation and responded to
the pain in her broken hip. She seemed burned by an inward fever and was
always calling for water.

“I’m scaldin’, Nellie, and achin’. Bring me some water in the tin cup,
in the little tin cup by the pump!” Glasses did not satisfy her thirst,
so June bought a tin cup for her. “It tastes so good and cold,” said
Oh-a, Oh-a.

June’s special pet was Sarah Lauthier, a tiny little lady of ninety-six.
June was Margaret to her and anyone who made a noise was Willie. On one
occasion, five nurses and a doctor were strapping a delirious, screaming
patient into the bed next to her and consciousness of the tumult
gradually sifted into her mind. “Willie!” she piped up. “Don’t make so
much noise. The neighbors will think we keep a disorderly house.”

June loved Willie, her cubby great-grand-child of ten. He came twice a
week with bottles of orange juice and sat by her bedside. When he had
been at her side for an hour, she realized that he was there, and
chirped at him happily. He always stayed for two hours, holding her
hand, and never seemed oppressed by the sickness around him.

For a time June almost succumbed to the temptation to break one of the
most stringent of the hospital rules. Sarah was continually beckoning to
her and whispering slyly in her ear, “You know what I want,” or
“Wouldn’t a wee drop of gin taste good.” And then June discovered that
little Willie was bringing her something that strongly resembled a Bronx
cocktail, judging by the smell of it. After that she was careful that
Granny’s orange juice was not confused with the orange juice of other
patients and that she got every drop of it.

Every morning when June arrived on the ward, she found the little old
woman, lying naked. It was evident that she could not endure being wet
and tore off her sheets and nightgown so that the warm air could dry
her. Her withered, crooked body was like that of Rodin’s ancient
courtesan.

At times her years dropped from her and she coquetted with June
adorably. She had the sweetest grin and the wickedest wink. And there
was a tiny dimple still left in one cheek when she laughed her silent
laugh.

One evening June found her trying to sew with her large brass cross at
the end of a rosary. “What are you trying to do, Granny?” She was
swearing softly to herself now and then.

“Can’t you see I’m trying to make a buttonhole, you damn fool? The
needle won’t go through. How can I keep warm without a buttonhole in my
gowns?”

And then Lora McAlister was carried into the ward and all its sordid
ugliness was lightened and relieved. Lora was twenty-eight, a widow,
with auburn hair and brown eyes. The floor man, an ex-patient, found
much to do in the neighborhood and wandered around singing under his
breath. June caught a few lines of a tuneless ballad once—“He placed his
hand upon her knee. She said, ‘my man, you’re mighty free’—”and then he
caught sight of her and the song died away in his throat. The doctors
haunted the ward and other patients were deluged with attentions. The
three men who were with Lora when the automobile accident occurred which
resulted in her broken hip obtained special permission to call at the
hospital to see her every afternoon, and the ward was beautiful with
flowers and plants.

In spite of her injuries which were severe, she threw off her lethargy
and powdered and primped and sewed ribbons on her night dress and sang
until the ward was aglow and the up-patients in the corridor stopped
their chattering to listen. The sixty and seventy year old women became
conscious of their sex and were more willing to have their faces washed.
They gave June quarters to buy them sweet-smelling talcums and relatives
appeared with dainty night dresses for them.

June had been in the hospital six months when she was transferred to the
male medical ward. She was glad to leave her old ladies for Sarah
Lauthier was about to die. She did not want to see her dead. So she got
permission to perform Granny’s morning toilet for the last time and
after gathering up her flung-out wet clothes around the bed, fastening
the old lady securely in a dry unbleached muslin night gown, tucking her
in tightly, and leaving a little kiss on the tiny dimple in her cheek,
she rushed breathlessly to the male building at the other end of the
grounds.

Ward fifty-four was a strange, wild place. June and Miss Andrews, a
capable young Irish girl who was two months June’s senior in training,
were alone in the ward from seven o’clock in the morning until seven in
the evening, save for the visits of the doctors and internes and the
much to be dreaded superintendent of nurses. The head nurse of the ward
was busy most of the day in the ward above and when she came, she came
to help not to criticize. It was the superintendent who stood sternly at
the end of the room and let her eye travel down the long ward for some
disorder or carelessness. It was hard not to be careless at this time
too, for an influenza epidemic had broken out over the city and every
day eight to ten victims were carried in or walked in staggeringly, only
to fall unconscious as soon as their clothes were taken from them.

According to the superintendent every ward in the hospital should be in
order by ten o’clock; but to get the work underway, June and Miss
Andrews did without their breakfasts in the nurses’ dining-room and
arrived on the ward at six-thirty.

However, Red Reynolds who used to keep a saloon on Coney Island and was
at present the kitchen-man, prepared an excellent breakfast of toast,
soft boiled eggs and coffee. While June ate, Miss Andrews worked and
kept a lookout for head nurses (it being against the rule to eat on the
ward) and June did the same for her.

The up-patients were already at work when the girls arrived, sweeping,
polishing brass, getting the linen in order and helping other more
miserable up-patients into their wheel chairs. The latter were trundled
out into the solarium where they sat all day and chewed tobacco and
gossiped of wine, women and war and occasionally of God. Sometimes you
could hear the cracked voice of an old sailor trying to sing a bar-room
song or the booming voice of the old German who was almost ossified,
singing a hymn.

June’s first task was to pour out the medicine for a hundred patients, a
task demanding concentration and a steady hand. When she first started
pouring, she continued pouring in her dreams every night, until she was
able to associate every patient with the medicine which he took. For
instance, whenever she saw Sullivan, her brain immediately flashed:

Arom. Spt. Am. Dr. I

Donov. Sol. M. 10

Pot. Iod. Gr. 15

Stokes M. Dr. I

There were almost as many medicines for each patient, and the entire
dose was handed out in one glass regardless of chemical combinations.
The convalescent patients greeted June hilariously as she came bringing
them what they called their cocktails and bracers.

It took two hours to pour and chart the medicines. All the while June
stood at the glass medicine cabinet in the center of the ward, Philip, a
handsome elderly man in the bed opposite to her, leisurely selected and
picked (with apparently great discrimination) a large bouquet of flowers
from the air, each one of which he sniffed with enjoyment before adding
it to the bunch in his hand. This he presented to June with a courteous,
grave smile, when she brought him his medicine, and she thanked him with
equal gravity and ceremony and arranged them in an imaginary vase on her
medicine tray. One time she noticed him pulling with a great deal of
effort at what must have been a goldenrod, it was so hard to separate it
from its stalk.

“If you try to break it, instead of tearing at it,” said the man in the
next bed kindly, “maybe you’ll get it off.”

There was another patient, a laundryman, with a red haggard face and
burning eyes, who took off his bed clothes, one by one and fed them into
an ironing machine. Even his night shirt was sacrificed in the stress of
his delusion, and wearily, again and again, June clothed him, and bound
him down in the bed with restraining sheets which he loosened in fifteen
minutes with his restless, strong, sick fingers.

Adele sat and sniffed into a handkerchief at the open window while June,
crouched on the bed in the corner where she couldn’t see how tantalizing
the spring evening was, was trying vainly to memorize the symptoms of
atropine poisoning.

“It seems to me that all the heart medicines have the same poisoning
symptoms,” she complained. “Now, mercury is easy to remember. If your
patients salivate, then you know they’ve got the first symptom. Then
their gums begin to swell and turn purple and then their teeth fall out.
When I first went on ward seventy-two, I had just learned those
symptoms, so I went around to all the patients who were taking mercury
in one form or another and looked at their mouths. And would you believe
it, every one of them complained of wanting to spit all the time! Those
internes had forgotten all about prescribing mercury and had left it on
the medicine chart and the damn-fool nurse who was in the ward before me
kept right on giving the medicine. I kicked to the head nurse—or rather
I reported the matter respectfully, for she’s an old devil—and she told
me to go right on giving the medicine till the doctor came on the ward
again. ‘Doctor’s orders must be obeyed.’ And the doctor might not be on
the ward again for a week!”

The ward was like a ship, she concluded, where the doctor was captain,
the superintendent first mate, the head nurse, second mate and the
nurses just ordinary seamen. They had to obey orders, nothing else. And
if they used their brains, and deduced that a patient was about to die
of strychnine poisoning unless the dose was stopped, they had to go on
giving the dose until word came from higher-up to stop it. Discipline
was a great thing. For any woman holding an executive position who was
about to have a nervous prostration, a course of training in a hospital
would surely cure her. If it didn’t kill her. June felt that she would
like to scream every now and then and throw medicine bottles at the head
nurses. But she felt too the relief of being told what to do and knowing
that she had to do it.

Suddenly she looked up from the book she was vainly trying to
concentrate her mind upon and noticed Adele with her handkerchief. “What
is the matter? Have you got a cold or are you crying?”

Adele admitted that she was crying and continued sniffing. June’s
sympathy made it worse.

“Oh, I like hospital work and I wouldn’t stop it for anything,” she
wept, “but every now and then you see something that actually breaks
your heart and you don’t see how you can stand it any longer. You know
Mary—the one I told you about with consumption and who had just had a
baby a month ago? Well, she’s dead.”

June knew that it wasn’t at the death itself that her sister was crying,
for they had talked of it and expected it every day for the past week.
It sounded callous but there was a sort of excitement in seeing how long
you could keep a person who was lingering with a fatal disease alive.

“She died at quarter to seven,” Adele went on. “And you know when a
patient dies at ten minutes of seven the day nurses leave the work to
the night nurses. Doctor Gleason was passing through the ward and signed
the death certificate then and there, the time of death marked at the
top of it and the day nurses had to ‘do up’ the dead body. Miss
Smith—she’s a month ahead of me—had to attend to it seeing as the head
nurse was off duty, and she and another girl went behind the screen and
you could hear everything they said through the ward and out in the
corridor. They swore—they said, ‘damn it, why couldn’t she have waited
till after seven. I’ve got a date tonight.’ And the other girl said,
‘Oh, hell, of course she had to wet the bed again before she died.’ And
you could hear them slap her as they turned her over to get the sheet
out from under her. The worst of it all was, the husband of the girl was
standing out in the hall all the time and he was just a young boy. He
was crying terribly. And I have been, too, ever since.”

Nursing was like newspaper work in that it was impossible to suffer long
over the tragedies which took place every day. You were too close to
them to have perspective. They happened too continuously. They weighed
on you—gave you a still and subdued feeling but the very fact that you
were continually busy left you no time to brood.

There was brightness on the ward, the brightness of the spring sunlight,
the cleanliness and the convalescent patients. Some patients could not
help shedding a jovial atmosphere about them. There was the old sailor
who called himself Captain Kidd, for instance. He had toppled into the
river and when rescued had emptied no one knew how many bottles of
whiskey to avoid bad effects, he told the doctor. But nevertheless he
had been brought into the hospital with influenza. Now he was
convalescing and his red bandanna handkerchief which he twined around
his head made the one spot of color in the white ward. Every time the
head nurse entered the ward she made him take it off. But it was on
again as soon as her back was turned and June received grateful little
nods and winks every time she was reprimanded for not having discipline
among her patients. Red handkerchiefs were untidy, it seemed.

Even the superintendent of the nurses, who had trained in that same
hospital long ago and had been there ever since, felt the influence of
spring. Her yellowish-grey hair usually was pulled straight back behind
her ears, but now it fluffed out a little like the wings of birds.
Instead of the high stiff collar which she wore all winter, there was a
low stiff one, but it was softened by a white and slightly withered
throat. Every other afternoon she lectured the first year girls on
anatomy and June noticed that the bones which she handled delicately, as
though they were flowers, were the same color as her hair.

There was an insistent somnolence in her voice which must have come from
years of association with the sick. It murmured on, those spring
afternoons like the bees in the park outside. On Thursdays there were
band concerts for the old peoples’ home next door and then the lecture
had to be cut short. It wasn’t only that Miss Daly couldn’t compete with
the noise. But the band was made up of twelve year old boys from the
Catholic school nearby and every now and then came a series of bars that
rasped on her nerves like the tearing of silk. She could not concentrate
on what was before her. And since the lecture had been cut short there
was a half hour of freedom for June and Adele to sit in the park and
watch the old people smoke and mumble to themselves.

“Every one of those old ladies smokes her pipe and the county allows her
tobacco,” June grumbled. “Gee, how I’d like to have a cigarette now . .
. . What is it that you miss at these Thursday afternoon band concerts,
Adele?”

“Lots of things.”

“No, I mean one thing specially. It’s the smell of cigarettes. I can’t
think of those park concerts and Mr. Armand without remembering that
odor of damp grass and people’s clothes and cigarettes.”

It was very restful there under the trees. The sparrows hopped up to the
little old women who had saved crusts for them in their apron pockets.
An occasional pigeon strutted up and down and a large black cat slunk
under the benches with her yellow eyes on the birds. The trees were
flecked with the pale green of new leaves.

June noticed one shrivelled little woman standing apart from the others
talking to a man who was also in the uniform of the county. “Sex
instinct at this late stage of the game,” she was about to say
jeeringly, for the little woman was laughing coquettishly. But the smile
was wiped off her lips as she recognized the bent figure as an
ex-patient of hers.

“See that little old thing,” she told Adele, almost tenderly. “I saw her
last night. You know the short cut I take when I’m in a hurry—around the
back of the chapel and laundry and the two old peoples’ homes. There the
two of them were last night, gripping each others’ hands, trying to tear
themselves away. Seven o’clock is their bed time you see. Husband and
wife being taken care of by the county, poor dears, and separated. He
kissed her so nicely, and she said, ‘remember John, don’t kick the
covers off tonight. You’ve got to be careful of your cold.’ Think of
them having to sneak around behind a laundry house to kiss each other!”

What she did not say was that now and then a vague longing came to
trouble her—she felt a restless need of some one who would clutch at her
and not want to let her go.
