% Thomas Merton, Trappist 1915-1968
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, December 1968, pp. 1,6

*Summary: Upon learning of Thomas Merton's sudden death, she quotes a
letter from him refuting the suggestion he was leaving monastic life. In
the quotes, Merton clarifies his role in the peace movement and gives a
Christmas message of hope at a time when we need courage. (DDLW \#901).*

A year ago Thomas Merton was sending out his Advent-Christmas letter and
telling of the death of three close friends by heart attacks. "Both were
about my age," he wrote. "So if I suddenly follow their example I will
be the last one to be surprised." He was fifty-three years old when he
died. On Wednesday, December 11, we received a telegram from the abbot,
telling of his death. We had no details of his dying from the New
York**Times** that morning, because we had an early edition which ran
only his prepared obituary. It was from a later issue of the paper that
we learned the details. I felt certain that it was indeed a heart attack
which had caused him to fall against a standing electric fan in the
monastery in Bangkok, which in turn fell upon him, burning him severely.
He had arrived in Bangkok a week before to attend a meeting of Roman
Catholic monks who had gathered to discuss monasticism in the Far East.

All of us at Tivoli and at St. Joseph's House of Hospitality on First
Street in New York were shocked and saddened by the loss of this friend
of the Catholic Worker and of the peace movement. He had been writing to
us since the Fifties and we had published a great number of his
articles. Ever since he wrote **Seven Storey Mountain,** which was
published in 1948 and made the best seller lists, he was kept busy by
his abbot, writing more books and essays. The New York**Times** said of
him that he was a writer of singular grace about the city of God and an
essayist of penetrating originality on the City of Men. He had become a
Catholic in 1938 and joined the Trappists at Gethsemani in 1941 and
lived at Bardstown, Kentucky, first in the monastery and then as a
hermit on the property. A few months ago he wrote us that he was asked
by his abbot to attend a series of meetings with monks of the Eastern
religions and to visit Trappist monasteries in the Far East. He regarded
this journey as a great opportunity to increase his study and contribute
to his writings about the mystical life of East and West. His books can
be obtained at any library and indeed in drug stores and bus stations
and wherever paperbacks are sold.

Today I heard the comment made by one of a group of people who were
helping mail out the November issue of the **Catholic Worker** that
Merton intended to leave his monastery and was very discontented at the
way the Trappist monasteries were run.

I would like to reprint a few quotations from some of his letters to me,
and these quotations will serve to answer this kind of gossip and also
serve as a Christmas greeting to us all.

"I am trying to get all the material I have done on peace together in a
book. Do please pray that the obstacles to this and the various
difficulties may smooth themselves out, by God's will. I think at any
rate the picture is rounding out and I am getting clear on what to say."

A Month Later
-------------

"Yesterday I mailed you a copy of the book which is **not** to be
published: **Peace in the Post-Christian Era.** My superiors, having been
alerted by zealous individuals in this country, felt that I was 'going
too far' and getting away from the contemplative vocation into
'dangerous ground,' etc. etc. The book has not even been censored, just
forbidden. I accept this with good will and I think humor, because there
is a lot of irony in it after all."

". . . Since I am not writing anything about war anymore, I have gone
back to the Fathers, to Cassiodorus, Cyprian, Tertullian, etc. I will
try to type out bits of things they say that could be used in the CW
here and there and will send them along. I will probably do a few
translations, and maybe write some prayers. I have to do a book on
Cassian some time, and thanks again for the translation you sent. We
always use it."

"It is no use speculating too much about the world situation, but it is
certainly a very risky one. The whole world is under judgement and one
feels it keenly. Without saying that I think something is going to
happen, I think I can say reasonably that there is just no reason for it
not to happen. I think the evil in us all has reached the point of
overflowing. May the Holy Spirit give us compunction and inner truth and
humility and love, that we may be a leaven in this world, and that we
may help and bring light to those who need it most; and the Lord alone
knows who they are, for the need of all is desperate."

About Leaving the Trappists
---------------------------

" . . . I know that I cannot really expect them (some pacifist friends)
to take the slightest interest in the peculiar problem I have, trying to
live an authentic life of solitude (which I certainly think will do more
for the peace movement than anything I write) . . . X. Y., by the way,
in a long letter argued that my whole monastic life was a pure evasion,
that I ought to be back in the world leading a life of authentic
involvement like himself, etc., etc. Don't worry, I have heard enough of
that to know what I think of it. I am more determined than ever on my
present course, in spite of what they may think about it. In fact their
opposition is to me another reason to continue obeying God rather than
man . . ."

"I honestly realize that my function now is not to try to be a voice in
the peace movement. I feel that such an attempt would be clearly false
on my part, playing a role God does not now ask of me (unless in some
particular situation it becomes evident that He does require me to
speak) . . . It is more and more clear to me that if I pretended to keep
up with politics here and tried to utter profound judgments from my
solitude I would be deceiving myself and perhaps others. . . . My
solitude has to be completely genuine, otherwise what use it is? . . . I
have had enough experience in 24 years of monastic life to know that
even if certain measures of superiors may be a little unfair, one never
loses anything by obeying, quite the contrary. And God sometimes
reserves special gifts and an extra fruitfulness for us, something we
could not have gained without this sacrifice . . . However, Superiors
will have to learn by experience that the Decree on Religious, in the
Council, meant what it said; that subjects are to be trusted more and
given more latitude in important matters. Maybe some will learn the hard
way. . . . the religious should obey and trust God. There is no better
way. If there were our Lord would have shown it to us. His example led
to the Cross."

A Christmas Greeting
--------------------

Reading over again Thomas Merton's last year's Christmas letter, sent to
all his friends, "The times are difficult. They call for courage and
faith. Faith is in the end a lonely virtue. Lonely especially where a
deeply authentic community of love is not an accomplished fact, but a
job to be begun over and over; I am not referring to Gethsemani, where
there is a respectable amount of love, but to all Christian communities
in general. Love is not something we get from Mother Church as a child
gets milk from the breast; it also has to be given. We don't get any
love if we don't give any . . . Christmas then is not just a sweet
regression to breast feeding and infancy. It is a serious and sometimes
difficult feast. Difficult especially if for psychological reasons we
fail to grasp the indestructible kernel of Hope that is in it. If we are
just looking for a little consolation we may be disappointed. Let us
pray for one another, love one another in truth, in the sobriety of
earnest Christian hope, for hope, says Paul, does not deceive."
