% On Pilgrimage - April 1952
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, April 1962, 1, 6.

*Summary: Celebrates the feast of the Annunciation with frolicking grand
children, kissing the springtime earth. Complains of fatigue and morning
stiffness. Laments her inefficiency but recommends relaxing prayer, even
in the midst of the disorder of happy children. (DDLW \#926).*

**On Pilgrimage**

Suddenly the children were all well again, Susie had gotten over her
mumps and Becky her fever, and it was the feast of the Incarnation.

The day before the rain had come down in sheets all day, driving against
the windows, and the wind howled around the house. But today the sun
shone and south wind was mild and the grass brightened into a fresh
green underneath the yellow weeds and the daffodil buds were about ready
to burst out.

Just as it was growing dusk, I remembered something Allan Bates had said
to us on that same feast at Maryfarm a year or two ago.

"On this day, when Christ took on our humanity, -- on this day of the
incarnation, we should go out and kiss the earth His feet trod and made
holy again."

"Let's do that," I told the children. "This is a most important day and
we should remember it. Nine months from now it will be Christmas; but
the baby Jesus was conceived on this very spring day in the womb of the
Virgin Mary. On this very day He began to dwell among us. It's the
beginning of Christmas now. Who wants to go out and kiss the ground?"

"I do," Susie said. "Me too," Nickie shouted. He always wants to be in
on everything. Eric is more silent and considering. "I'm not going to do
it," Beckie sniffed as though she thought it silly and I remembered the
Little Flower who refused to kiss the ground for a penny. Becky too
would not bow her haughty little head.

"I'll come out too," Tamar said, and added practically, "The Sun is
going down and we have to take the clothes down besides." So we took the
clothes smelling of sunlight and fresh air down from the lines and
brought them in the house.

The grassy place under the mulberry trees was a good spot for afternoon
tea, for mud pies, for picnics, so we all knelt down on the soft sod and
kissed the earth, and as we did so all the children, Becky, Susie, Eric
and Nicholas began turning somersaults and there was a wild confusion of
legs and curls and we all ended up laughing.

It had been a lovely day. In town visitors had started coming to the
office at ten, Bob Boshart from the Chicago house of Hospitality, Mr.
Gaffney whom Tom had met at Holy Ghost Abbey in Conyers last month and
others and Beth and I had alternately typed, answered letters, talked to
visitors and answered the telephone. Tom and Bob were running the
addressograph downstairs.

After two p.m. I went down to Staten Island, stopping in at Tamar's
before going over to the Peter Maurin Farm. It had been one of those
quick trips where N.Y. bus, ferry and S.I. bus all synchronized and I
got there in an hour and a half. There were dishes to do, while Tamar
saw the electrician about some repairs and then we went out to have
coffee under the trees. Becky was just coming in from school when we
started to read the story of St. Francis and the Wolf of Gubbio. Becky
knew all about it already and had a picture in her school bag
illustrating the story I was reading from **The Little Flowers of St.
Francis.**

That was for the children's enjoyment, and when I went on to the
story of Brother Juniper and how he cut off the pig's foot for a sick
brother, Tamar and I almost collapsed laughing. It was so much like the
things Catholic Workers are always doing, with the best will in the
world.

First Things First
------------------

For the last month I have been almost collapsing with fatigue, however,
and with groanings, what with trying to work in town, and in the country
(and at two places there.) At night I crawl into bed with an aching back
wondering how I can ever get out of it in the morning, my eyes too heavy
even to read, my brain unable to think. And in the morning, the first
hour is an agony of stiffness, aches and pains, until after the
comforting morning coffee and good whole wheat bread.

"I just don't know how to relax while working," I thought as I helped
Tamar over a tub of clothes or dishes. When there are five children
there is no end to both. "Relax," I kept saying to myself, thinking
enviously of such people as Julia Porcelli, Helen Dolan, Alice Zarrella
and Kay Brinkworth who have efficiency in everything they do and what
they do seems to be without effort.

But it is hard to start learning how to relax or how to be efficient at
housework at the age of fifty-four. The one thing one can keep starting
over again to do, is to put first things first. To remember the primacy
of the spiritual. To let the house go and just sit out under the sky and
breathe deeply for a while and pray one word, over and over. "Short
prayer pierceth heaven," the author of **The Cloud** writes. "Take thee
but a little word of one syllable; … such a word is this word GOD or
this word LOVE …And fasten this word to thy heart, so that it never go
thence for anything that befalleth … This word shall be thy shield and
thy spear … with this word thou shalt beat on this cloud and this
darkness above thee. With this word thou shalt smite down all manner of
thought under the cloud of forgetting. Inasmuch that if any thought
press upon thee to ask thee what thou wouldst have, answer them with no
more words but this one word."

For those who have much to do, or think they have, Mother Stuart's words
are interesting. "One may progress in prayer just as much in the high
pressure of full work as in the low pressure of less absorbing duties,
for if they are allowed to, they expand like gas and tend to fill all
the space available."

While I am writing these things I am thinking of all the families around
the country in the Catholic Worker movement who are so completely
absorbed with the cares of a large and growing family. (In a number of
them there are already nine children). Not many of us are efficient.

And is it efficient, to worry about the disorder attendant on a
household of happy children? "Children have their own order," Tamar
says, as she goes about tending her potted plants and disregarding the
bedlam about her. "Children's work is to grow," Jane O'Donnell said once
as she watched the antics of four small children she was caring for in
their mother's absence. I think of that when I watch the perpetual
motion of a two, four, five and six year old running from one end to the
other, climbing chairs, taking flying leaps from a couch out into the
middle of the floor.

There can be silence, prayer, peace in the midst of it all. If you
practice at it.

Dorothy Day
