% Fall Appeal - October 1970
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, Oct 1970, p. 2

*Summary: Appeals for funds saying, "All small gifts add up, and we
surely need them" Mentions the death of two catholic workers and
anticipates a two-month trip around the world noting she has seen the
poor of the world--"literally." (DDLW \#930).*

The Catholic Worker  
36 E. 1st St.  
New York, N.Y. 10003   

October 4th, 1970

Dear Readers of the Catholic Worker:

This is the way I remember you in my prayers daily. For you, and for all
who break bread with us, the poor, the sick, the unwanted, the
prisoners; and for all of you who answer our appeals for help to keep
the work going, year after year. All small gifts add up, and we surely
need them.

At the farm at Tivoli there is a population of about fifty, and though
the crops are good and plenty of fine vegetables, there are heavy
expenses of taxes, utilities, laundry, flour for bread and so on. In
town we have run our bread bill up at times to \$900 before our East
Side baker gets impatient for payment. We pay for our beans, peas,
lentils which thicken our soup, into which goes meat stock and all the
fresh vegetables we can beg. We even are given hundreds of little cups
of yogurt each week to feed the soup-line, which is growing longer and
longer - usually there are about 300 meals served daily. A community
means more than a houseful now; it also means neighbors and guests and
wanderers from coast to coast.

There have been some deaths in our group since I last wrote. The latest
is Italian Mike, who presided for years at the mailing-out table (a
group of devoted volunteers mail out 85,000 copies of the C.W. each
month). He sat because he could not walk, what with his ulcerated legs.
When he could walk he fetched our bread and our fish from as far as
twenty city blocks away, in an old baby carriage made into a cart. When
he swept the sidewalk in front of our house, he swept also the two
adjoining sidewalks. He knew all the neighbors. He died with loving
friends visiting him each day at Bellevue.

But Fred died in a bar, visiting his friends on the Bowery. He had
worked long with us on the farm. When I shared a room with old Agnes
(who died a few years ago), he used to bring us coffee on a tray (the
life of Riley, Agnes called it), and he cut her tangled hair when she
was too feeble to do it herself, shampooed it too. We have seen
unbelievable tenderness shown to the sick, the old and the dying, by
"the undeserving poor." Agnes herself once shared her room with three
others, one of them a girl expecting a baby. "She cries in the night,"
Agnes said.

I will be writing about the two-month speaking trip which is taking me
literally around the world, paid for by priests in Australia who have
know our work since World War II, when they visited all our houses of
hospitality as they crossed the U.S. on their way home. Literally, I
have seen the poor of the world, the aborigines of Australia, the poor
of Hong Kong, of Calcutta, of Africa where Julius Nyerere, Catholic
president of Tanzania, has nationalized land and, with an Israeli Peace
Corps, is studying the formation of communes like the Kibbutzim. There
are great and noble men in the world today, and they write, thank God,
for those who read. Men like Dom Helder Camara in Brazil, Jayaprokash
Nararyan in India, and Ved Mehta and the editors of such journals as
Resurgence, Manas Peacemaker, Savadaya--who give another view of history
and economics, and man and his capacities. My trip is a two months' long
one, but I will be back in New York by the time you get this letter.

With love and gratitude for the help you give us,

Dorothy Day
