% Security
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, Jul-Aug 1935, p. 4

*Summary: Summary: A passionate rejection of the false security of wages
and the maxim "Be moderate, be prudent." Instead she promotes the
counsels and precepts of the gospel in this time of world-wide crisis
for religion and poverty. She asks, "What right has any one of us to
have security when God's poor are suffering?" (DDLW \#939).*

Security
--------

Christ told Peter to put aside his nets and follow him. He told the
rich young man to sell what he had and give to the poor and follow Him.
He said that those who lost their lives for His sake should find them.
He told people to take no thought for the morrow. He told his followers
that if anyone begged for their coats to give up their cloaks too. He
spoke of feeding the poor, sheltering the homeless, visiting those in
prison and sick and also of instructing the ignorant. He said, "Inasmuch
as ye have done it unto the least of these, ye have done it unto me." He
said, "Be ye therefore perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect."

But the usual comment is: "You must distinguish between counsel and
precept. You forget that He said also 'All men take not this word, but
they to whom it is given.' 'He that can take it let him take it'."

Paul Claudel said that young people have a hunger for the heroic, and
too long have they been told, "Be moderate, be prudent."

Too long have we had moderation and prudence. Today is a time of crisis
and struggle. Within our generation, Russia has rejected Christianity,
Germany has rejected it, Mexico fights to exterminate it, in Spain
religious orders have been expelled, in Italy Fascism has exalted the
idea of the State and rejecting the Kingship of Christ, has now a
perverted idea of authority. Here in the United States the President on
the one hand ignores the simpering approval our Ambassador to Mexico has
placed on the persecution of the Catholic Church there, and is busy
experimenting to find "a way out" of our economic ruin.

We Oppose the Wage System
-------------------------

In this present situation when people are starving to death because
there is an over-abundance of food, when religion is being warred upon
throughout the world, our Catholic young people still come from schools
and colleges and talk about looking for security, a weekly wage.

They ignore the counsels of the gospels as though they never heard of
them, and those who are troubled in conscience regarding them speak of
them as being impractical.

Why they think that a weekly wage is going to give them security is a
mystery. Do they have security on any job nowadays? If they try to save,
the bank fails; if they invest their money, the bottom of the market
drops out. If they trust to world practicability in other words, they
are out of luck.

If they sell their labor (see Peter Maurin's essays) they are
prostituting the talents God gave them. College girls who work at Macy's
– is this what their expensive training was for? – boys who go into
business looking for profits – is this what their Catholic principles
taught them? – are hovering on the brink of a precipice. They have no
security and they know it. The only security comes in following the
precepts and counsels of the gospels.

Members One of Another
----------------------

If each unemployed nurse went to her pastor and got a list of the sick
and gave up the idea of working for wages and gave her services to the
poor of the parish, is there not security in the trust that God will
provide? This is but one instance of using the talents and abilities
that God has given to each one of us.

What right has any one of us to have security when God's poor are
suffering? What right have I to sleep in a comfortable bed when so many
are sleeping in the shadows of buildings here in the neighborhood of THE
CATHOLIC WORKER office? What right have we to food when many are hungry,
or to liberty when the Scottsboro boys and Tom Mooney are in jail?

St. Thomas says, "The counsels of perfection are, considered in
themselves, expedient for everybody," and he adds charitably, "but owing
to the varying dispositions of people there are some for whom they are
not expedient because their inclinations do not tend in that direction."

But to those in whose minds these questions are stirring there are those
words directed –

"Today if you shall hear my voice, harden not your hearts."

## \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

*This is the true fraternity, which overcame the crimes of the world; it
followed Christ, attaining the noble kingdom of Heaven.*

–*(From the Gradual for July 9.)*
